# Introduction to Cloud Computing

## Cloud Computing Platforms

Cloud computing platforms offer different services such as virtual machines, data storage, networking and load balancing, static content hosting and much more.

Cloud providers also offer varying ecosystems of IaaS, CaaS, PaaS and FaaS.

Some of the most popular cloud platform providers include:

- Amazon Web Service
- Microsoft Azure
- Google Cloud Platform
- OpenStack
- Oracle OCI
- IBM Bluemix
- Pivotal Cloud Foundry
- Rackspace

## Enterprise & DevOps Perspective

While DevOps and cloud computing are neither mutually exclusive nor directly related, when combined they each reinforce the other.

The flexibility that comes with cloud computing enables DevOps teams to meet the demands of the business and its customers almost instantly. If more resources or a new database or load balancing server are required, the cloud enables automated delivery of these requirements in a matter of minutes.

Cloud computing has enabled, through the use of automated processes and robust design, products and services that can scale to the needs of the business.

## Benefits

All of them have pricing that is similar to each other with little variance depending on the comprehensiveness of the platform.
Cloud platforms also give us the ability to easily scale the number of environments we have by being able to bring up new environments for building, developing, and testing on demand.

There is also much networking security set in place for users to be able to configure exposed ports, firewalls, security groups, identity, access keys and private networks. Most of the cloud platforms are also designed for high availability. For example, AWS provides availability zones where standby instances are set up in case an instance crashes or has any sort of failure. Metrics are also generated for feedback on how applications are managing compute resources.
Most importantly, cloud platforms pave the way for automating infrastructure creation and environment provisioning. Cloud platforms such as AWS and Azure work hand in hand with infrastructure orchestration tools such as Terraform.

Cloud computing services also aid in disaster recovery time as the majority of issues are handled by the provider of the service.
