---
docs/4-cloud-computing/4.2.6-ecs.md:
  category: Cloud Computing
  estReadingMinutes: 10
  exercises:
    -
      name: DevOps Knowledge Share in ECS
      description: Containerizing a UI and API that communicate together. Create an IAM role with ECS and ECR services. Push images to ECR. Create a cluster with ECS. Create a Launch Template and Auto Scaling Group to connect to this ECS cluster. Configure the ECS cluster to run your application.
      estMinutes: 720
      technologies:
      - AWS
      - AWS ECR
      - AWS ECS
      - Docker
      - AWS Auto Scaling Group
      - AWS Launch Template
---

# ECS

In this section we'll be exploring the functionality and use of Amazon's Elastic Container Service (ECS). Unlike the virtual instances you've used previously in this chapter, ECS uses Docker containers linked together in logical clusters, allowing for users to quickly and easily start and stop containers as needed.

> Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) is a highly scalable, high-performance container orchestration service that supports Docker containers and allows you to easily run and scale containerized applications on AWS. Amazon ECS eliminates the need for you to install and operate your own container orchestration software, manage and scale a cluster of virtual machines, or schedule containers on those virtual machines. [Amazon Elastic Container Service](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/)

ECS configures containers using Task and Service structures. Task Definitions are used to specify a collection of one or more containers. Tasks Definitions are then assigned to Services that can be used to run one or more instances of a Task. This structure allows users to easily scale and provision resources for a cluster.

Checkout this great explanation: [What is the difference between a task and service?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42960678/aws-ecs-what-is-the-difference-between-a-task-and-a-service)

## Exercise

To get an understanding on how containers need to communicate with one another, we will be utilizing the [DevOps Knowledge Share UI](https://github.com/liatrio/dks-ui) application we used before as well as the corresponding [API](https://github.com/liatrio/dks-api).

1. Start by taking the ui and api listed above and test them locally. Go though the `docker-compose.yaml` file to understand _what_ these microservices need.
2. Then containerize them using Docker. (`make docker-build`)
3. Push them up to ECR.
4. Create an IAM Role that provides EC2 instances with access to ECS and ECR services.
5. Create a cluster within ECS with EC2 instances not Fargate. Don't choose spot instances as this complicates things as your instances get reclaimed by AWS. When configuring your cluster to simplify things remove any private subnets.

?> If you are running on an arm machine ensure your EC2 instances supports arm workloads

7. Configure your cluster to run the application. Refer to the `docker-compose.yaml` files in `dks-ui` and `dks-api` to get a sense for what each service needs.

?> I recommend standing up your microservices in the following order validating each piece as you go: dks-db, dks-api, then dks-ui. See this example [task definition for dks-db](https://github.com/liatrio/devops-bootcamp/blob/master/examples/ch4/aws/ecs/dks-db-task-definition.json) and the [db init script](https://github.com/liatrio/dks-api/blob/6ee4e6aa87b62e4387d613cbd442863b60d07657/db-resources/0_0_db.sh).

?> To interconnect services look into [AWS Service Discovery](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/interconnecting-services.html). Managing Service Discovery Namespaces and Services is simpler via the awscli. See the [following for reference](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/create-service-discovery.html#create-service-discovery-namespace). The Service Discovery Namespace name and the Service Discovery Service name will control the resulting DNS record. This will also dictate what you set for DB_HOST environment variable for the dks-api.

?> If you are having issues getting Services started and check out logs on the host the container was scheduled at `/var/log/ecs/ecs-agent.log`

8. Verify that your demo was set up by visiting the front end in your browser.
9. Clean up your resources: Service Discovery Namespace (AWS Cloud Map in the console), ECS Cluster (Delete Cloud Formation Stack for easy cleanup), KMS Key, Application Load Balancer.

## Deliverables

- Explore a microservice demo by running it on ECS.
- Discuss why you may want to use ECS and microservices.
- Discuss the difference between task definitions, tasks and services in ECS.
