---
docs/4-cloud-computing/4.3.4-az-packer.md:
  category: Cloud Computing
  estReadingMinutes: 5
  exercises:
    -
      name: Create Shared Image Gallery with custom Azure VM image
      description: Create a Shared Image Gallery and put a custom Azure VM image in it. Then redo the exercise in 4.3.2 with the custom image.
      estMinutes: 360
      technologies:
      - Azure
      - Packer
      - Shared Image Gallery
      - Azure VM
---

# Packer and shared VM Images on Azure

In this section we will demonstrate how Packer can be used to create images in Azure Shared Image Galleries. We will build upon the learnings from previous sections and use this custom image to re-create our VMSS from section 4.3.3. Using Packer to create our own custom images, instead of Azure marketplace images, gives us the ability apply configurations or security hardening practices that are specific to our needs. Packer can also use various provisioners (e.g. Ansible, Shell) to perform image customization.

> [Shared Image Gallery](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/shared-image-galleries) is a service that helps you build structure and organization around your custom images. While we could create custom images in Azure without using a Shared Image Gallery, using the Shared Image Gallery allows us to easily share images across subscriptions.

## Create a Shared Image Gallery and use Packer to populate it with a custom Azure VM image

1. Log into Azure CLI and select the correct subscription.

2. Create a resource group for the Shared Image Gallery and associated resources.

3. Use Azure CLI to create a Shared Image Gallery in the resource group you created.

4. Create an image definition.

```bash
az sig image-definition -h
```
!> This is only an image definition, your packer file will build the image that will publish to the Shared Image Gallery

4. Create a custom Linux image using Packer with the [azure-rm](https://www.packer.io/docs/builders/azure/arm) builder. Make sure the image is published to the Shared Image Gallery you created in step 3. Ensure the shell provisioner steps are included to deprovision (generalize) the VM image. Feel free to use JSON or HCL2 for your Packer template, either should work.

?> Make sure the packer template uses the same image name as the definition from step 4, otherwise the build will fail.

?> It make take a quite a while for Packer to publish to the SIG, please be patient!

5. Use Azure CLI to obtain the ID of the new custom image version that you created. [Look here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/sig?view=azure-cli-latest) to get started.

6. Redo section 4.3.2 using our new custom image, starting from step 3. Only a minor change to step 6 is required to use our custom image instead of the default marketplace image.

## Deliverables

- What is the purpose of using Packer in Azure Shared Image Galleries?
- What are some potential challenges or considerations when publishing an image to the Shared Image Gallery with Packer?
- Why is an image definition needed as aside to just creating and publishing the VM to the Shared Image Gallery?
