---
docs/4-cloud-computing/4.3.3-vmss.md:
  category: Cloud Computing
  estReadingMinutes: 15
  exercises:
    -
      name: Create VMSS and serve content from Azure Storage Account
      description: Create a VMSS and serve content from an Azure Storage Account. Do this via the cli, deploying a simple node web app and provision the VM's with cloud-init.
      estMinutes: 330
      technologies:
      - Azure
      - Azure VMSS
      - Azure Storage Account
      - Node.js
      - cloud-init
---

# Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS)

In this section we will demonstrate how Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS) work in Azure. We will build upon the learnings from previous sections and use a VMSS to host our simple website. Web assets will be hosted from shared storage in an Azure Storage account. We will then generate some artificial load to make sure scaling is working as expected.

> [VM Scale Sets](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machine-scale-sets/overview) let you create and manage a group of load balanced VMs. The number of VM instances can automatically increase or decrease in response to demand or a defined schedule. Scale sets provide high availability to your applications, and allow you to centrally manage, configure, and update a large number of VMs. With virtual machine scale sets, you can build large-scale services for areas such as compute, big data, and container workloads.

## Create a VMSS and serve content from an Azure Storage Account

1. Log into Azure CLI and select the correct subscription.

2. Create a resource group for the VMSS and associated resources.

3. Create a new storage account and assign the name of the account to the environment variable STORAGE_ACCOUNT.

4. Get the primary storage access key for the storage account using Azure CLI and assign it to the environment variable STORAGE_KEY using query values. You can [look here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/storage/account?view=azure-cli-latest) to get started.

5. Use Azure CLI to create a file share in the storage account with a 1GB quota. Populate the environment variable SHARE_NAME with the name of your new file share.

6. Create a simple Node.js app that returns the hostname of the VM (same one we used in section 4.3.2).

?> Make sure you are starting in an empty directory.

```js
var express = require('express')
var app = express()
var os = require('os');
app.get('/', function (req, res) {
  res.send('DevOps Bootcamp sample app running on host ' + os.hostname() + '!')
})
app.listen(3000, function () {
  console.log('Test app listening on port 3000!')
})
```

7. Build the Node.js app locally first. Launch it locally and make sure it works.

8. Upload the Node.js app to Azure file share we created in step 5.

```bash
az storage file upload-batch -h
```

9. Update the cloud-init script for VMSS. It now will mount Azure Files share containing our Node.js app and launch from that mount. This way multiple VMs can serve the same content from a central location.

!> Substitue these values STORAGE_ACCOUNT, SHARE_NAME, and STORAGE_KEY.

```yaml
#cloud-config
package_update: true
package_upgrade: true
packages:
  - nginx
  - nodejs
  - npm
write_files:
  - owner: www-data:www-data
  - path: /etc/nginx/sites-available/default
    content: |
      server {
        listen 80;
        location / {
          proxy_pass http://localhost:3000;
          proxy_http_version 1.1;
          proxy_set_header Upgrade \$http_upgrade;
          proxy_set_header Connection keep-alive;
          proxy_set_header Host \$host;
          proxy_cache_bypass \$http_upgrade;
        }
      }
runcmd:
  - mkdir "/mnt/webapp"
  - 'mount -t cifs //STORAGE_ACCOUNT.file.core.windows.net/SHARE_NAME /mnt/webapp -o vers=3.0,username=STORAGE_ACCOUNT,password=STORAGE_KEY,dir_mode=0755,file_mode=0664'
  - service nginx restart
  - cd "/mnt/webapp"
  - nodejs index.js
```

10. Create a VMSS with Azure CLI that uses our updated cloud-init script. Use the same SSH keys you generated in section 4.3.2. Specify an instance count of 2 for the scale set. Use environment variable VMSS_NAME to hold the value for the name of the scale set.

?> It can take several minutes to provision the VMSS. For bonus points, deploy the VMSS with different VM SKU sizes and note the differences in deployment times.

11. When the VMSS was created, it automatically created a load balancer instance. Add a **load balancing network rule** to it so we can reach our Node.js app. The load balancer name will be your VMSS_NAME with and LB at the end. Similarly.

- The name of the load balancer that was created is "${VMSS_NAME}LB"
- Backend pool name should be "${VMSS_NAME}LBBEpool"
- Use tcp protocol
- Use port 80
- There are more required arguments (explore around)

12. Get the public IP for load balancer and make sure we can reach the Node.js app using cURL. You should see responses from both instances in the scale set.

13. Create an autoscaling profile with a resource type of Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachineScaleSets. The minimum number of VMs should be 2 and the maximum should be 4. Make sure to set the default amount.

```bash
# This will come in handy later.
AUTOSCALE_PROFILE=YOUR_NAMEautoscaleprofile123
az monitor autoscale create -h
```

14. Use Azure CLI to create some scale-in and scale-out rules based on CPU usage for the autoscaler profile you just created. Your scale-out rule should trigger when CPU percentage is over 70% over a 5 min period. Your scale-in rule should trigger when CPU percentage has dropped below 30% over a 5 min period.

15. Use Azure CLI to check how many instances are currently running in the scale set.

16. Get the connection info for the individual instances in the scale set.

17. SSH into each instance and generate some load so we can trigger the scale-out rule. Use the top command to ensure CPU usage is increasing before you log out of the instance.

```bash
sudo apt-get -y install stress ; sudo stress --cpu 10 --timeout 420 &
```

?> You will need to specify a different port number (e.g. 50001) when you SSH into the instances.

18. Confirm if a new instance has been added after about 5 minutes. After waiting for the stress test to finish and another 5 minutes, the scale set should return to 2 instances.

19. Cleanup by deleting the resource group.

## Deliverables

- What is the purpose of Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS)?
- Explain the difference between scaling out and scaling in within the context of VMSS.
- Discuss how VMSS would be used in a real-world scenario, such as a large-scale web service.
