---
docs/3-virtual-machines-containers/3.5.1-docker-compose.md:
  category: Container Orchestration
  estReadingMinutes: 5
  exercises:
    -
      name: Docker Compose GitHub Actions and Nexus
      description: Create a compose file that spins up your GitHub Actions and Nexus containers, exposing ports, and using volumes for persistent storage
      estMinutes: 120
      technologies:
      - Docker
      - Docker Compose
      - GitHub Actions
      - Nexus OSS
---

# Docker Compose

[Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) manages multiple Docker containers using a single `docker-compose.yml` configuration file. With it, you can build and run an entire environment using just the `docker-compose up` command. Sound familiar to any other tools you've used lately? The configuration options correlate directly with arguments used with the Docker CLI which makes it an easy tool to start using as you're getting familiar with Docker. It lacks features needed for complicated environments but has some very useful use cases.

?> As of Docker Desktop version 3.4.0, the new [Compose V2](https://docs.docker.com/compose/cli-command/) integrates compose commands into the Docker CLI. As of June 2023, the `docker-compose` command will no longer be supported on Docker Desktop and will be replaced with `docker compose` (the '-' is replaced with a space). The command can be used after installing Docker Desktop, no longer requiring a separate installation.

## Use Cases

- Managing local development environments or sharing among a team of developers.

- Sharing a demo of a containerized application.

Read the Docker Compose [getting started](https://docs.docker.com/compose/gettingstarted/) guide to familiarize yourself with writing a Docker Compose file and the basic commands.

## Exercise

This exercise will build on the earlier container section by creating a Docker Compose file to run your GitHub Actions and Nexus containers.

1. Create a `docker-compose.yml` file with the following criteria:

    - Builds and runs your GitHub Actions and Nexus images.

    - Opens ports to expose the UI.

    - Creates volumes to persist application data on your local filesystem.

?>Docker Compose [networking](https://docs.docker.com/compose/networking/) helps running services communicate by allowing each container to query other containers using the service name as the hostname.

2. Run `docker compose up` to create your environment and ensure you can access the application UIs.
3. Run your GitHub action on your spring-petclinic fork and verify the artifact is deployed to your Nexus.
4. Run `docker compose down` and `docker compose up` to recreate the environment and check that the GitHub Actions configuration and Nexus data are persisted.

## Knowledge Check

<div class="quizdown">
  <div id="chapter-3/3.5.1/docker-compose-quiz.js"></div>
</div>

## Deliverables

- Understand the basics of Docker Compose
- Understand the differences between using base Docker and Docker Compose
- Be able to express the benefits of using Docker Compose over base Docker
