# 8.1.2 App Management

### Contents

`apply` `annotate` `autoscale` `diff` `edit` `label` `patch` `replace` `scale` `set` `wait`

### 1. apply

- Apply a configuration to a resource by file name or stdin. Creates the resource if it doesn't exist.
```bash
kubectl apply (-f FILENAME | -k DIRECTORY)
```
    - Apply a file: `-f`
        - `kubectl apply -f pod.yaml`
    - Apply a directory: `-k`
        - `kubectl apply -k /dir`

### 2. annotate

- Update the annotations on one or more resources.
```bash
kubectl annotate [--overwrite] (-f FILENAME | TYPE NAME) KEY_1=VAL_1 ... KEY_N=VAL_N [--resource-version=version]
```
    - Add an annotation. Ex. Update the pod "foo" with the annotation "description" with a key of "my frontend".
        - `kubectl annotate pods foo description='my frontend'`
    - Remove an annotation.
        - `kubectl annotate pods foo description-`

#### Useful Options

- Overwrite an existing annotation: `--overwrite`
  - `kubectl annotate pods foo --overwrite description='my frontend'`

### 3. autoscale

- Looks up a deployment, replica set, stateful set, or replication controller by name and creates an autoscaler that uses the given resource as a reference. An autoscaler can automatically increase or decrease the number of pods deployed within the system as needed.
```bash
kubectl autoscale (-f FILENAME | TYPE NAME | TYPE/NAME) [--min=MINPODS] --max=MAXPODS [--cpu-percent=CPU]
```
    - `kubectl autoscale rc foo --min=2 --max=5 --cpu-percent=80`
        - Scale the replicaset "foo" with a minimum of 2 pods to a maximum of 5, target CPU utilization at 80%.

### 4. diff

- Diff configurations specified by file name or stdin between the current online configuration, and the configuration as it would be if applied.
```bash
kubectl diff -f FILENAME
```
    - `kubectl diff -f pod.yaml`
        - Diff resources included in pod.json.

### 5. edit

- ❗️ Edit a resource from the default editor.
bash
```bash
kubectl edit (RESOURCE/NAME | -f FILENAME)
```
    - `kubectl edit deployment my-app`

### 6. label

- Update the labels on a resource.
```bash
kubectl label [--overwrite] (-f FILENAME | TYPE NAME) KEY_1=VAL_1 ... KEY_N=VAL_N [--resource-version=version]
```
- `kubectl label pods nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz env=dev`
  - Add the label "env=dev" to the pod "nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz".

### 7. patch

- Update fields of a resource using strategic merge patch, a JSON merge patch, or a JSON patch.
```bash
kubectl patch (-f FILENAME | TYPE NAME) [-p PATCH|--patch-file FILE]
```
- `kubectl patch node node01 -p '{"spec":{"unschedulable":true}}'`
  - Patch "node01" to be unschedulable, where `-p` denotes the patch being applied.

### 8. replace

- Replace a resource by file name or stdin.
```bash
kubectl replace -f FILENAME
```
- `kubectl replace -f ./pod.yaml`
  - Replace a pod using the data in pod.yaml.

### 9. scale

- Set a new size for a deployment, replica set, replication controller, or stateful set.
```bash
kubectl scale [--resource-version=version] [--current-replicas=count] --replicas=COUNT (-f FILENAME | TYPE NAME)
```
    - Kubectl scale --replicas=5 rs/foo
        - Scale the number of pods in the replica set to 5.

### 10. set

- Configure application resources. These commands help you make changes to existing application resources. The following can be used for the subcommand: env, image, resources, selector, service account, subject.
```bash
kubectl set SUBCOMMAND
```
- `kubectl set env deployment registry STORAGE_DIR=/local`
  - Update deployment 'registry' with a new environment variable.
- `kubectl set image deployment nginx busybox=busybox nginx=nginx:1.9.1`
  - Set a deployment's Nginx container image to 'nginx:1.9.1', and its Busybox container image to 'Busybox'.
- `kubectl set resources deployment nginx -c=nginx --limits=cpu=200m,memory=512Mi`
  - Set a deployments nginx container cpu limits to "200m" and memory to "512Mi".

### 11. wait

- Wait for a specific condition on one or many resources.
```bash
kubectl wait ([-f FILENAME] | resource.group/resource.name | resource.group [(-l label | --all)]) [--for=delete|--for condition=available|--for=jsonpath='{}'=value]
```
    - kubectl wait --for=condition=Ready pod/busybox1
        - Wait for the pod "busybox1" to contain the status condition of type "Ready".
    - kubectl wait --for=jsonpath='{.status.phase}'=Running pod/busybox1
        - Wait for the pod "busybox1" to contain the status phase to be "Running".
