# 8.1.3 Working with Apps

### Contents

`auth` `cp` `describe` `exec` `logs` `port-forward` `top`

### 1. auth

- Inspect authorization.
  - Check whether an action is allowed: `can-i`
    ```bash
    kubectl auth can-i VERB [TYPE | TYPE/NAME | NONRESOURCEURL]
    ```
        - `kubectl auth can-i list secrets --namespace dev --as dave`
            - Administrators can combine this with user impersonation to determine what action other users can perform.
        - `kubectl auth can-i list pods --namespace target --as system:serviceaccount:dev:dev-sa`
            - Similarly, to check whether a ServiceAccount named dev-sa in Namespace dev can list Pods in the Namespace target.

### 2. cp

- Copy files and directories to and from containers.
    ```bash
    kubectl cp <file-spec-src> <file-spec-dest>
    ```
  - Copy from a local directory to a remote pod.
    - `kubectl cp /some/local/dir <some-pod>:/some/remote/dir`
      - Specify a container: `-c`
  - Copy from a remote pod to a local directory.
    - `kubectl cp <some-pod>:/some/remote/dir /some/local/dir`
      - To specify as namespace use: `kubectl cp <some-namespace>/<some-pod>:/some/remote/dir /some/local/dir`

### 3. describe

- Show details of a specific resource or group of resources.
```bash
kubectl describe (-f FILENAME | TYPE [NAME_PREFIX | -l label] | TYPE/NAME)
```
    - ❗️ Describe a resource - `kubectl describe RESOURCE`
    - Describe a resource with the label name=myLabel - `kubectl describe RESOURCE -l name=myLabel`
    - Describe all pods managed by the 'frontend' replication controller # (rc-created pods get the name of the rc as a prefix in the pod name) - `kubectl describe pods frontend`

### 4. exec

- Execute a command in a container.
```bash
kubectl exec (POD | TYPE/NAME) [-c CONTAINER] [flags] -- COMMAND [args...]
```

#### Useful Options

- ❗️ Invoke the default shell - `kubectl exec -it nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz -c nginx -- sh`
  - `-it` is a combination of:
    - `-i`: Pass stdin to the container
    - `-t`: Stdin is a TTY
  - `-c` is the container to exec into
- Issue a command - `kubectl exec nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz -c nginx -- date`

### 5. logs

- Print the logs for a container in a pod or specified resource. If the pod has only one container, the container name is optional.
```bash
kubectl logs [-f] [-p] (POD | TYPE/NAME) [-c CONTAINER]
```

#### Useful Options

- ❗️ Follow the logs: `-f`
  - `kubectl logs -f nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz`
- Print a previous container's logs: `-p`
  - `kubectl logs -p nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz`
- Retrieve logs based on age: `--since`
  - `kubectl logs --since=1h nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz`
- Retrieve the last # lines of output: `--tail`
  - `kubectl logs --tail=20 nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz`

### 6. port-forward

- Forward one or more local ports to a pod.
```bash
kubectl port-forward TYPE/NAME [options] [LOCAL_PORT:]REMOTE_PORT [...[LOCAL_PORT_N:]REMOTE_PORT_N]
```
    - Listen on port 8888 locally, forwarding to 5000 in the pod.
        - `kubectl port-forward pod/mypod 8888:5000`
    - Listen on ports 5000 and 6000 locally, forwarding data to/from ports 5000 and 6000 in a pod selected by the deployment.
        - `kubectl port-forward deployment/mydeployment 5000 6000`
    - Listen on port 8443 locally, forwarding to the targetPort of the service's port named "https" in a pod selected by the service.
        - `kubectl port-forward service/myservice 8443:https`

### 7. top

- The top command allows you to see the resource consumption for nodes or pods. This command requires Metrics Server to be correctly configured and working on the server - `kubectl top nodes|pods`
  - Example for `kubectl top pods`
    ```bash
    NAMESPACE     NAME                                     CPU(cores)   MEMORY(bytes)
    default       nginx-6799fc88d8-nqzxz                   0m           5Mi
    default       php-apache-746d649758-t8k7s              1m           9Mi
    kube-system   coredns-558bd4d5db-tzc6n                 20m          11Mi
    kube-system   coredns-558bd4d5db-zxrnr                 16m          11Mi
    ```
  - Example for `kubectl top nodes`
    ```bash
    NAME                           CPU(cores)   CPU%   MEMORY(bytes)   MEMORY%
    node01   174m         9%     1499Mi          48%
    node02   361m         18%    2827Mi          38%
    node03   54m          2%     571Mi           8%
    node04   183m         9%     1668Mi          54%
    ```
