---
docs/8-kubernetes-container-orchestration/8.5-hpas.md:
  category: Container Orchestration
  estReadingMinutes: 15
  exercises:
    - name: Create an HPA
      description: Install Metrics Server, apply the deployment and service for a CPU-intensive PHP image, and create an HPA that will scale the PHP deployment based on CPU usage.
      estMinutes: 120
      technologies:
        - Docker
        - Kubernetes
        - Metrics Server
    - name: Increase Server Load
      description: Increase the PHP server load and watch how the CPU load scales.
      estMinutes: 30
      technologies:
        - Docker
        - Kubernetes
    - name: Decrease Server Load
      description: Decrease the server load and watch how the CPU load scales down.
      estMinutes: 30
      technologies:
        - Docker
        - Kubernetes
    - name: HPAs with Multiple Metrics
      description: Configure the HPA to use multiple metrics, add memory as a resource in the PHP-Apache deployment, update the HPA, and verify its functionality.
      estMinutes: 180
      technologies:
        - Docker
        - Kubernetes
---

# 8.5 HPAs

## HPAs in Kubernetes

An HPA (Horizontal Pod Autoscaler) automatically scales resources like deployments and stateful sets to match demand. More pods are deployed as load increases and vice versa when load decreases. By default, HPAs can only use one metric- such as CPU or memory usage- to determine when to scale, but they can be configured to use as many as necessary via modifications to their API version and configuration.

## Create an HPA

1. Using Docker Desktop, install [Metrics Server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server#deployment).

2. Clone the [bootcamp repository](https://github.com/liatrio/devops-bootcamp.git) if you haven't already and apply the deployment and service for a cpu-intensive PHP image using the example from `examples/ch8/hpas/cpu-intense-deploy-svc.yaml`.

3. Create an HPA with the `kubectl autoscale deployment --help` command that will scale the PHP deployment between 1 and 5 pods when the average CPU usage across pods in the deployment exceeds 65%. The deployment will upgrade its replica set accordingly. It will take a few minutes to come up.

## HPA Troubleshooting

1. Check the status of the HPA with `kubectl get hpa`. A target of 0% indicates no targets are sending requests to the PHP server.

2. Ensure the HPA is working correctly with `kubectl describe hpa php-apache`, wait for "Conditions" and "Events" to appear.
It appears there are a few errors. Investigate the necessary arguments for "Metrics Server" to run on a local Docker Desktop cluster and edit the deployment accordingly.

## Increase Server Load

1. Increase the PHP server load. In a separate terminal window, run:

```bash
kubectl run -i --tty load-generator --rm --image=busybox --restart=Never -- /bin/sh -c "while sleep 0.01; do wget -q -O- http://php-apache; done"
```

- options:
  - -i
    - Keep stdin open on the container(s) in the pod, even if nothing is attached.
  - -tty
    - Tells Docker to allocate a virtual terminal session within the container.
  - --rm
    - Ensures the Pod is deleted when the shell exits.
  - --image=busybox
    - The busybox image contains a basic shell that comes with useful utilities like wget, which is useful for trying to do network requests.
  - --restart=Never
    - Don't restart the pod if it exits.

2. Watch the CPU load scale with `kubectl get hpa php-apache --watch` and `kubectl get deploy php-apache --watch`.

3. Wait a minute and check how many replicas are in the "php-apache" deployment now.

## Decrease Server Load

1. Exit the busybox pod.

2. Watch the CPU load again with `kubectl get hpa php-apache --watch`.

3. After five minutes, check the number of pods in the deployment. How many are there now?

## HPAs with Multiple Metrics

HPAs can be configured with multiple metrics; this requires switching the apiVersion from "autoscaling/v1" to "autoscaling/v2" among other changes. Update Docker Desktop if this API version doesn't show up when you run `kubectl api-versions | grep autoscaling`.

1. Add "memory" under resource *requests* and *limits* in the "php-apache" deployment with `kubectl edit deploy php-apache` for 10.5M and 42M respectively.

2. Output your current HPA to a file by `kubectl get hpa php-apache -o yaml > hpa.yaml`.

3. Edit the file to support v2 and add an additional metric for memory with the average value set to 12M.

4. Delete the old HPA and apply the v2 version.

5. Memory should now be visible alongside CPU as targets when running the command `kubectl get hpa php-apache`.

### Deliverables

- Differentiate between horizontal and vertical scaling.
- Discuss what constitutes a full monitoring solution and does Metrics Server fulfill that description?
