---
docs/8-kubernetes-container-orchestration/8.6.1-validating-admission-policy.md:
  category: Container Orchestration
  estReadingMinutes: 35
  exercises:
  - name: Basic ValidatingAdmissionPolicy
    description: Create a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy to replicate the behavior of a Validating Webhook, rejecting pods in a specific namespace based on image.
    estMinutes: 60
    technologies:
    - Kubernetes
    - ValidatingAdmissionPolicy
    - CEL
  - name: Dynamic ValidatingAdmissionPolicy with Params
    description: Create a more complex ValidatingAdmissionPolicy using paramKind and paramRef to implement dynamic, namespace-specific validation for deployment replica counts.
    estMinutes: 90
    technologies:
    - Kubernetes
    - ValidatingAdmissionPolicy
    - CEL
    - Custom Resources
  - name: Warning ValidatingAdmissionPolicy
    description: Implement a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy that warns developers about an upcoming required label on Deployments.
    estMinutes: 40
    technologies:
    - Kubernetes
    - ValidatingAdmissionPolicy
    - CEL

---

# Native Admission Controller

Validating cluster resources is a common use case, but the 1.7 Admission Webhooks approach is far from perfect. Creating admission webhooks is not trivial and comes with significant overhead. One must write the webhook server, run this server on the cluster, manage TLS certificates, consider upgrade and rollback strategies, and maintain the webhook applications. In short the 1.7 admission webhooks while versatile creates significant overhead for platform teams as they are an application. In addition to this maintenance overhead classic admission controller webhooks increase latency adding network hops to requests and poorly configured webhooks can actually brick your entire cluster. These pains have been recognized in the community for years and lead to a whole industry of tooling such as Kyverno, OPA Gatekeeper, Kubewarden, and more. While these alternatives are robust and well supported (and you should pick one if you are creating Admission Webhooks) they still have the same limitations that the 1.7 Admission Webhooks do.

## ValidatingAdmissionPolicy

Introducing the newly generally available [ValidatingAdmissionPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/). This is a native admission controller that leverages the [CEL (Common Expression Language)](https://github.com/google/cel-spec/blob/master/doc/intro.md) to enable cluster admins to easily create validating admission policies without the overhead. ValidatingAdmissionPolicy have lower network overhead, lower operational overhead, no infrastructure requirements, and increased reliability. This is the way and if you need to do write admission policy this should be your de facto method.

> API docs for ValidatingAdmissionPolicy and ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding can be found [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.30/#validatingadmissionpolicy-v1-admissionregistration-k8s-io)

### Setup

All you really need here is a local cluster running kubernetes <= 1.30 but for this exercise we will be using `k3d` for our local cluster. `k3d` is akin to `kind` or `minikube` but unlike the other local cluster alternatives you can create a multi-node local cluster. This is not possible with `kind` or `minikube`. Additionally under the hood k3d is running k3s a popular lightweight kubernetes distribution by Rancher Labs.

- If you don't have it already install `k3d`
```shell
curl -s https://raw.githubusercontent.com/k3d-io/k3d/main/install.sh | bash
```

- Verify you have at least v1.30 of `k3s` installed
```shell
➜  devops-bootcamp ✗ k3d --version
k3d version v5.7.3
k3s version v1.30.3-k3s1 (default)
```

- If you have an earlier version of `k3s` you can start a new cluster and specify the version like so. A full list of `k3s` image versions can be found [here](https://hub.docker.com/r/rancher/k3s/tags)
```shell
k3s cluster create <cluster-name> --image rancher/k3s:v1.30.5-k3s1
```

## Exercise 1

For this exercise we are going to recreate the Validation Webhook logic you created in [8.6](./8.6-webhooks.md), but this time with a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy.

1) Destroy and recreate a new cluster. `unset KUBECONFIG; k3d cluster delete <cluster-name>; k3d cluster create <cluster-name>`

2) Create the `myapp` namespace

3) Create a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy that will reject pods in the `myapp` namespace that do not have the image `myapp:latest`

4) From `examples/ch8/webhooks` run `kubectl apply -f test-pods`. This should only create pods 2, 4, and 5
?> CEL expressions can be challenging to write. Check out the [CEL Playground](https://playcel.undistro.io/) and the [available expression variables](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/validating-admission-policy/#validation-expression)

## Exercise 2

ValidatingAdmissionPolicy CEL expressions have access to a number of different variables that can allow policy authors to create dynamic policies. One such variable is `param`. This is an optional variable that allows policies to validate against arbitrary namespaced or cluster-wide resources. For this exercise we will leverage the `paramKind` and `paramRef` fields for ValidatingAdmissionPolicy and ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding to create dynamic namespaced validation policy for max replicas.

1) Destroy and recreate a new cluster. `unset KUBECONFIG; k3d cluster delete <cluster-name>; k3d cluster create <cluster-name>`

2) In `examples/ch8/validatingadmissionpolicy` run `kustomize build | kubectl apply -f -`

3) Create `validatenamespacequota.yaml` and create an admission policy that verifies deployments are not created or updated with a replica count that exceeds the `NamespaceQuota` `maxReplicas`. This policy needs to use the `NamespaceQuota` resource, do not hard code limits in your expressions.

?> Make sure that you are only using one admission policy and one admission policy binding to manage the deployments in both the development and production namespaces

4) From `examples/ch8/validatingadmissionpolicy` run `kubectl apply -f tests`. Only `valid-dev-deploy` and `valid-prod-deploy` should be created.

5) Your org is going to roll out a required label on all Deployments for `criticality` that should be one of `HIGH|MEDIUM|LOW`. Create a new ValidatingAdmissionPolicy that warns developers if their Deployment is missing this upcoming requirement with the following custom message "Deployments need a label of 'criticality' starting on 1/1/2027 with the values 'HIGH', 'MEDIUM', or 'LOW'""

6) Delete and reapply the test deployments. Both "valid" deployments should get created but you should see a warning on `valid-dev-deployment`

## Knowledge Check

<div class="quizdown">
  <div id="chapter-8/8.6.1/validatingadmissionpolicy-quiz.js"></div>
</div>

## Deliverables

- Advantages of ValidatingAdmissionPolicies over Validating Webhooks
- Limitations of ValidatingAdmissionPolicies
- What are the required components for a ValidatingAdmissionPolicy, what does each piece _do_
- How are ValidatingAdmissionPolicy.spec.failurePolicy and ValidatingAdmissionPolicyBinding.spec.ValidationActions related?
