---
docs/8-kubernetes-container-orchestration/8.7.2-helm.md:
  category: Container Orchestration
  estReadingMinutes: 5
  exercises:
    - name: Source a Helm Chart
      description: Declaratively define a Gitea Helm Chart to be sourced and templated locally. Deploy it to a cluster, port-forward to its server and log in.
      estMinutes: 45
      technologies:
      - Kubernetes
      - Helm
      - Kustomize
    - name: Modify the Helm Chart
      description: Use the values file and kustomization.yaml to modify the Helm Chart.
      estMinutes: 30
      technologies:
      - Kubernetes
      - Helm
      - Kustomize
---

# 8.7.2 Helm

Back in Chapter 6, you got hands on with Helm and learned how to produce your own Helm Chart. While this is valuable knowledge, the reality is that you will rarely ever need to do this. Nearly all, if not all of your experience with Helm will be as a *consumer*, not a producer. There are many extremely valuable Kubernetes components that are deployed as Helm Charts, like `cert-manager`, `external-secrets`, and `argocd` just to name a few.

You actually did deploy the `cert-manager` Helm Chart in this chapter... remember [this](8-kubernetes-container-orchestration/8.6-webhooks.md#setup)? However, in that case you only interacted with the chart imperatively by using the `helm` cli tool, and had very little insight into what was actually happening or getting deployed to your cluster.

This section will show you the proper way to interact with Helm Charts as a consumer, and how to configure them *declaratively* as code before using them.

**Setup**: Before the following exercises, set up a fresh Kubernetes cluster that you can deploy resources to. You'll also want to `brew install helmfile` if you haven't already.

## Exercise 1: Source a Helm Chart

For these exercises, we'll be using the [Gitea](https://about.gitea.com/) Helm Chart.

* To begin, create a `helmfile.yaml` file to install the `gitea-charts/gitea` Helm Chart at version `10.4.1`.
> This is the file responsible for defining where to find the Helm Chart (the repository) and the actual chart information itself (the release).
> You can read about proper syntax [here](https://helmfile.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). For the `releases` section, specify the values file in the next bullet point instead of passing in values inline.

* Next, create a `values-gitea.yaml` file. You can leave this empty for now, as it will be used in Exercise 2.
> This is where you'll make any modifications that you need to make to the Helm Chart, but you are limited to whatever modifications the chart creators templated into the chart, and therefore allow you to make.

* Next, create the following `Makefile`. It isn't necessary, but is a commonly practiced pattern as it makes things like vendoring much smoother during CI:
```makefile
values := $(wildcard values-*.yaml)
helm-chart.yaml: helmfile.yaml $(values)
    helmfile template > $@
```
> `helmfile template` is what is responsible for actually reading your `helmfile.yaml`, pulling the chart down, and then templating it with the contents of your `values-gitea.yaml`.

* Assuming you formatted your `helmfile.yaml` file correctly, running `make` should *source* and *template* the chart into a new `helm-chart.yaml` file.
> Note that this file gets generated from the Makefile, so you should **never** make modifications to it. Try changing something in `helm-chart.yaml` and then rerun `make`. The change is lost.

* Finally, now that the chart is generated, all that's left is to actually deploy it. For reasons stated in the previous section, use Kustomize for this process. Create a `kustomization.yaml` that references the inflated chart (`helm-chart.yaml`) and the following `namespace.yaml` as resources. Using Kustomize, set the namespace for all resources to be `gitea`.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: gitea
```
  
Up until this point, your working directory should look like this:
```bash
.
├── Makefile
├── helm-chart.yaml
├── helmfile.yaml
├── kustomization.yaml
├── namespace.yaml
└── values-gitea.yaml
```

* Build your resources using Kustomize, and apply to your cluster:
`kustomize build . | kubectl apply -f -`

?> Note that different Kubernetes versions support different `apiVersion` values, and you'll need to keep that in mind when it comes to your chart configuration.

* Port-forward to the `gitea-http` service and verify you can reach the server and log in.

?> Hint: You can find the default login information in the upstream `values.yaml`

## Exercise 2: Modify the Helm Chart

Now that you're declaratively defining a Helm Chart that gets pulled from upstream, it's time to make some modifications to it.

Using the tools at your disposal, make the following changes to your resources:

* Change the admin username/password
* Change the storage size of the PersistentVolumeClaim to `3Gi`
* Set a memory limit of `2Gi` for the Deployment
* Change the `restartPolicy` of the `gitea-test-connection` pod to `OnFailure`

## Knowledge Check

<div class="quizdown">
  <div id="chapter-8/8.7.2/helm-quiz.js"></div>
</div>

## Deliverables

* What advantages do you have when using Helm Charts declaratively instead of imperatively?
* What role does Kustomize play when using Helm Charts?
  * What is the limitation of Helm, and how does Kustomize solve them?
