---
docs/3-cloud-computing/3.2.2-ec2.md:
  category: Cloud Computing
  estReadingMinutes: 10
  exercises:
    -
      name: Hello EC2
      description: Create EC2 VMs and configure one as a Jenkins server and the other as a Jenkins agent registered to the server.
      estMinutes: 240
      technologies:
      - AWS
      - EC2
      - Jenkins
---

# EC2

## Exercise

Through these steps you will build two servers on AWS, one as a Jenkins master and the other a Jenkins agent.

> Items in commands that are in all CAPS should be replaced with correct input.

1. Create an EC2 key pair in AWS.

2. Create an EC2 Security Group.

   - This security group is where you will handle port forwarding

3. Create a Jenkins master instance and make of note of the Instance ID and Public DNS name.

   - Find a CentOS AMI on the marketplace.

```bash
aws-vault exec PROFILE_NAME -- aws ec2 run-instances --image-id AMI --count 1 --instance-type t2.micro --key-name KEY_PAIR_NAME --security-groups SECURITY_GROUP
```

4. Name your server, replace Justin with your name in lower case:

```bash
aws-vault exec PROFILE_NAME -- aws ec2 create-tags --resources INSTANCE_ID --tags "Key=Name,Value=justin-jenkins-master"
```

5. Login to your host. The default username might be ec2-user, but you may have to search for the correct username, and you will have to use your private key file:

```bash
ssh -i PRIVATE_KEY_FILE -l USERNAME PUBLIC_DNS_NAME
```

6. Install Jenkins. Use your notes from earlier in the bootcamp.

7. To stop your instance at the end of the day:

```bash
aws-vault exec PROFILE_NAME -- aws ec2 stop-instances --instance-ids INSTANCE_ID
```

8. To start up your instance the next day:

```bash
aws-vault exec PROFILE_NAME -- aws ec2 start-instances --instance-ids INSTANCE_ID
```

9. The DNS name is not persistent through shutdown and start. Run step 6 again to get the hostname of your instance.

10. Note we'll need to clean things up by the end of the week as running instances and their storage cost money.

**To permanently destroy and delete your instance:**

```bash
aws-vault exec PROFILE_NAME -- $ aws ec2 terminate-instances --instance-ids INSTANCE_ID
```

### Create a Jenkins agent instance (open ended exercise)

1. Create an instance based on the previous steps and name it yourname-jenkins-agent. Do not install Jenkins on the agent however. To use this system as an agent, google for steps. I found these links useful:
   - <https://linuxacademy.com/blog/linux-academy/adding-a-jenkins-agent-node/>
   - <https://gist.github.com/mgedmin/9547214>
   - <https://www.caktusgroup.com/blog/2012/01/10/configuring-jenkins-slave/>
2. As a high level overview you will need to create a private ssh key for the Jenkins user on the Jenkins master. A Jenkins user will need to be created on the agent and the public key from the Jenkins master will need to be added to the authorized keys so the Jenkins master can ssh to the Jenkins agent and tell it to execute jobs and commands.

## Deliverable

Run multiple application deploys.
