# ECS

In this section we'll be exploring the functionality and use of Amazon's Elastic Container Service (ECS). Unlike the virtual instances you've used previously in this chapter, ECS uses Docker containers linked together in logical clusters, allowing for users to quickly and easily start and stop containers as needed.

> Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) is a highly scalable, high-performance container orchestration service that supports Docker containers and allows you to easily run and scale containerized applications on AWS. Amazon ECS eliminates the need for you to install and operate your own container orchestration software, manage and scale a cluster of virtual machines, or schedule containers on those virtual machines. [Amazon Elastic Container Service](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/)

ECS configures containers using Task and Service structures. Task Definitions are used to specify a collection of one or more containers. Tasks Definitions are then assigned to Services that can be used to run one or more instances of a Task. This structure allows users to easily scale and provision resources for a cluster.

Checkout this great explanation: [What is the difference between a task and service?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42960678/aws-ecs-what-is-the-difference-between-a-task-and-a-service)

## Exercise 1

To get an understanding on how two containers need to communicate with one another, we will be utilizing the [RealWorld](https://codebase.show/projects/realworld) application. The project linked is a collection of frontends and backends all for the same application, but all created using different programming languages. The goal of this exercise is to pick one of each, containerize it, and deploy them to an ECS cluster.

1. Start by choosing one backend and one frontend of your choosing.
  - Some may already have Dockerfiles in their repositories while others need to be created.
2. Containerize them and test them locally.
3. Create an IAM Role that provides EC2 instances with access to ECS and ECR services.
4. Push them up to ECR.
5. Create a cluster within ECS
6. Create a Launch Configuration and Auto Scaling group to start an EC2 instance and connect it to your ECS cluster.
7. Once you have an EC2 instance to run containers on, configure your cluster to run the application.
8. Verify that your demo was set up by visiting the front end in your browser.

> Amazon has its own tool called CloudFormation which is used to provision resources on AWS. Although we will not be using it in this exercise, CloudFormation configuration files can be a great reference for defining the environment needed to run your application.

## Exercise 2

Setting up microservices by hand can be difficult, especially when you have a lot of services and containers to configure. Many tools exist to automate the process, including Amazon's Cloud Formation service. In this exercise we'll set up a much larger microservices demo using Cloud Formation alongside ECS.

1. Clone the [Sock Shop Demo](https://github.com/liatrio/microservices-demo)
2. Use the [deployment guide](https://microservices-demo.github.io/deployment/ecs.html) to set up the demo on ECS.
  - You may want to edit `msdemo-cli` so you can change the names of your services.
3. Verify that the setup worked by visiting the site in your browser.

## Deliverables
- Two microservices demos running on ECS.
- Discuss why you may want to use ECS and microservices.
- Discuss the difference between tasks and services in ECS.

