---
docs/5-software-development-practices/5.5.4-code-coverage.md:
  category: Software Quality
  estReadingMinutes: 20
  exercises:
    -
      name: Achieve 100% code coverage
      description: Install node dependencies for code coverage (jest) and get 100% code coverage for a given module and tests.
      estMinutes: 90
      technologies:
      - Node.js
      - Jest
---

# Code Coverage:

Code coverage is the percentage of code which is covered by automated tests. Code coverage measurement simply determines which statements in a body of code have been executed through a test run, and which statements have not. There are many ways to check code coverage and they all vary depending on the language you are using. For the Go language coverage testing is built in so you can use the `go test -cover` command. In many other languages you will have to use a third party tool like [Coveralls](http://www.coveralls.io), [Codecov](http://www.codecov.io), or [Istanbul](https://istanbul.js.org/).

## Exercise 1:

You will be using [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) to test the code coverage in the provided code. You can find the code in the bootcamp repository inside the examples folder.

The following code is a series of functions written in Javascript (simple.js):

[sampleCode](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/liatrio/devops-bootcamp/971baf1f2bbef2097b8e42508aff0811fc034e6d/examples/codeQuality/jest-simple/simple.js ':include :type=code javascript')

The following code contains the unit tests that will be testing the Javascript functions (simple.test.js):

[testCode](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/liatrio/devops-bootcamp/971baf1f2bbef2097b8e42508aff0811fc034e6d/examples/codeQuality/jest-simple/simple.test.js ':include :type=code javascript')

Please perform the following:

* Install Node

        brew install node

* Install Jest to your node project
        npm install jest

After installing those dependencies take a moment to examine your package.json file. Note that jest is currently in the section called "dependencies". This may not be ideal for a production environment, because if you set up a docker file or some other container to work with this file you may end up downloading a bunch of dependencies you don't necessarily need.

Try redoing the previous steps, but install the files as a developer dependency. Once you have done that take a look at your package.json file.

?>Note: When installing Jest with the npm command, use the -D (or --save-dev) tag to install as a developer dependency.

The provided Javascript package.json file will have everything you need in order to pass the Jest tests; however, you will need to add to the file in order to get Jest to check your coverage.

[package](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/liatrio/devops-bootcamp/971baf1f2bbef2097b8e42508aff0811fc034e6d/examples/codeQuality/jest-simple/package.json ':include :type=code json')

Inside your package.json file under the “scripts” section, add a section called “coverage” and use the following command

`jest --coverage`

Make sure that your “test” section is running the following command

`jest`

Run your code with the following command:

`npm run coverage`

## Exercise 2:

Now that you have Jest running and you can check your code coverage. Add another unit test to the simple.test.js file so that you achieve 100% coverage.

## Exercise 3:

For this exercise, we are going to be utilizing **mocking** with Jest.  Mocking is when we use a placeholder value for calls outside of the function we are looking at, with the assumption that the function works correctly.  We can then use the mock to provide the information we expect to be returned, and continue on in the unit test.

For this test, we are going to be using a [github user and repo checking program](https://github.com/liatrio/devops-bootcamp).  The functions have already been written, and a group of tests has been made for the user checks.  *Note that the API-calling functions have been abstracted out of the logic code, and into a simple file dedicated for those calls.*

You will have to make your own tests for the repo check functions, with as much coverage as possible.  Pay attention to how the example mocked function is set, and the behaviors used before and after each repo check test.

# Deliverables

* How does code coverage help developers?
* What are some scenarios that make it harder to achieve 100% coverage?
* Do you think it's required to have 100% coverage for it to be effective?
* What are some situations where mocking is especially helpful?
* Are there any downsides to using mocks in your tests?
