---
docs/5-software-development-practices/5.5.5-test-automation.md:
  category: Software Quality
  estReadingMinutes: 5
  exercises:
    -
      name: Create a GitHub Action to test a Go project
      description: Create a GitHub Action that will run Unit Tests when a change is pushed
      estMinutes: 180
      technologies:
      - GitHub Actions
      - Go
---

# Automated Testing

Automated testing is a crucial step to ensure code quality because developed tests are guaranteed to run once new source code is committed. GitHub Actions is a tool that can help us leverage our tests in a build step. With a testing stage in GitHub Actions, code quality can be ensured by automatically running the tests that have been written. If tests fail, the build can be marked as unstable and deployment will not occur.

?> If you want to test the creation or alteration of a GitHub workflow before committing it, you can use a tool called [ACT](https://github.com/nektos/act)

## Exercise 1

1. Create a new workflow, `test`, like you did for the `getting-started` workflow in the `GitHub Actions` section of the bootcamp.
2. Set up this workflow to run whenever code changes are pushed to any branch of your repository
3. Create jobs for the workflow:
    * `Setup` - Setup the Go Language
    * `Test` - Run your Unit Tests, make sure this job depends on the `Setup` job
4. Commit and push the changes
5. Go to the Actions tab on your repository fork and verify that `test` workflow ran successfully.

## Exercise 2

1. Open up your `getting-started` workflow that you created in the `GitHub Actions` section of the bootcamp.
2. Edit this workflow to include the `Test` and `Setup` jobs you created in Exercise 1 as part of this workflow
3. Alter the existing `simple` job to depend on the `Test` job completing successfully.
4. Commit and push the changes to your `getting-started` workflow.
5. Go to the Actions tab on your repository fork and verify that `build` workflow ran successfully.

## Exercise 3 - Badges

1. Update the `README.md` to include a workflow status badge for your `test` workflow.

# Deliverables

* Discuss the positives of having your testing built into an automation tool such as GitHub Actions
* Discuss the benefits of having workflow badges on your projects
