# Terraform Providers

At this point you should have a good grasp of how to declaratively define infrastructure as code and manage the state of that infrastructure using Terraform. Now we are going to pull back the curtain and take a deep dive into how Terraform works behind the scenes.

All resources and data sources in Terraform are created by a **provider**. Providers are Terraform plugins that define how resources are declared and how the state of those resources should be reconciled. Anyone can write a Terraform provider and providers can be shared publicly or privately via provider repositories. This extensibility is part of what makes Terraform so powerful.

?> Take a look at the providers that are published to the [official Terraform repository](https://registry.terraform.io/browse/providers)

In this section you will write your own Terraform provider to interact with an API we have written. The API defines some trivial endpoints which simulate operations to create, read, update and delete some resources. The API doesn't provide any real functionality but for the purposes of these exercises you should imagine that it provides an interface to configure a real service.

When you finish with this section you should have a much better understanding of how Terraform providers work which will help you learn and use other providers.

Throughout this section it will be helpful to refer to the [Custom Framework Providers](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/providers-plugin-framework) tutorial for example code, however there are significant differences between those tutorials and these exercises.

!> Be careful when googling for examples. There are many tutorials written for different versions of the Go Terraform plugin library that will not work with these exercises.

## Exercise 1: Provider Boilerplate

This exercise will walk you through setting up the boilerplate for a Terraform provider and ensure you can test it locally.

1. Clone the [terraform-provider-scaffolding](https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-scaffolding-framework) repo.

2. Change the provider name to `devops-bootcamp` and configure the provider server address as `liatr.io/terraform/devops-bootcamp`

3. Test that the provider executes correctly by running `go run main.go`. You should see the following output:

   > **_NOTE:_**  This binary is a plugin. These are not meant to be executed directly. Please execute the program that consumes these plugins, which will load any plugins automatically exit status 1

4. Build a binary for your provider `go build -o terraform-provider-devops-bootcamp`

5. Edit `~/.terraformrc` and add the follow dev override to use the local version of your provider:

    ``` go
    provider_installation {

      dev_overrides {
          "liatr.io/terraform/devops-bootcamp" = "PATH_TO_PROVIDER"
      }

      direct {}
    }
    ```

6. Create a Terraform module with the following configuration to test your provider:

    ``` go
    terraform {
      required_providers {
        devops-bootcamp = {
          source = "liatr.io/terraform/devops-bootcamp"
        }
      }
    }

    provider "devops-bootcamp" {
      # example configuration here
    }
    ```

7. Run `terraform plan` to ensure Terraform can find and use your provider.
