# Configuration Managers

### Overview

Configuration Managers (C.M.) are important even in this day of containerization and virtualization. They can be used to set up hosts, create Docker images, create AMIs, and more. Many companies are not yet comfortable with the idea of Docker so this is a nice step in that direction. 

At the end of this section you will: 

- Understand the benefits of configuration management
- Be able to discuss the main differences and pro/cons of configuration management
- Compare configuration management with containerization
- Describe the benefits of immutable infrastructure
- Be able to explain Infrastructure as Code. 

### Understand Configuration Management

Digital Ocean has [An Introduction to Configuration Management](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/an-introduction-to-configuration-management) tutorial that is worth reading. Read this before the initial discussion with the leader. 

### Configuration Management vs Containerization

As you have already learned, containerization is a powerful idea that allows companies to ship pieces of their applications. Historically this type of work was done with C.M. tools but containers do some things better. Containers are built to be repeatable and self contained.

#### Server Set Up with Configuration Management

C.M. is the best way to set up a host to be ready for containerization. Many companies that Liatrio does business with will have on-prem servers that need to be configured for hosting a container service. It may seem like a trivial task but there may be thousands of servers that need updates and maintaining versions with a C.M. is the easiest way as it can abstract layers of complexity. 

#### Server Set Up with Containers

There is no good way to set up a host with containers. It is typically a poor idea to run containers in containers (i.e Docker-in-Docker). There is technically the option of using cloud services like [Amazon ECS](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/) (but they may use C.M. to handle that themselves). Ultimately, the ephemeral nature and one-purpose idea make containers a bad choice for setting up hosts. 

#### Application Deployment with Configuration Management

This is something that containers may have the upper hand on. Configuration management tools can deploy applications fine but the problem becomes these long running servers that change over time leaving the remnants of the applications throughout. If something is changed in one version of the C.M.'s but isn't explicitly removed in another then that change lives on undetected. What if a user goes in there and changes something that the C.M. isn't maintaining? That change lives on until the server dies or is explicitly changed which leaves vulnerabilities in reliability and security. Rollbacks aren't the easiest because the same server that was modified to hold the new version of software needs to be reprovisioned and there may be new (potentially hazardous) drift added.

#### Application Deployment with Containers

Containers were designed for application deployment. You can set up a container to contain the specific attributes for that piece of software. Containers should only handle one particular piece of a project (micro services). This not only helps for scalability but repeatability. The host machine should be able to handle whatever container gets pushed to it and the container should handle all application information. This helps make roll backs simpler by being able to grab an older image of the container. 

### Immutable infrastructure

Immutable infrastructure means that once the environment or server is created then it cannot be altered. Containers do this incredibly well because they are a baked image that spawns a container. Environments maintained by C.M. tools may have an entry point and the tool itself makes changes to the environment. Immutable infrastructure doesn't allow a user to shell in and make changes either. Changes must be done before the environment is done provisioning. Immutable infrastructure is not an easy feat, though. 

### Creating Images with Configuration Management

One thing that is popular in some organizations is using configuration management to bake images. Images can be for containers, virtual machines, or even Amazon AMIs. This helps to abstract some of the complexity of setting up containers. This allows the use of unit testing, int testing, local dev, and more. It also creates a more universal set up. Most configuration management tools work with native OSes, Vagrant, Docker, and Packer so a C.M. script can create the same outcome on different platforms (note: there are complexities with each that may need to be addressed).  

<center>

## Deliverables

</center>

<div class="grid2"><div class="col">
<center>

**Engineers**

</center>

What is Config Management and explain how it acts in an enterprise
- Why is it important to new age software engineering?
- Why use infrastructure as code?
- Why might some people be against the technology?
- Can containerization and configuration management live together?
- What does abstracting layers of complexity mean?
- What is configuration drift?
- Why might immutable infrastructure be helpful?
- Why might we want to create images with a configuration manager?

</div><div class="col">
<center>

**Consultants**

</center>

- What is this tool?
- How is it used in an enterprise?
- Explains Liatrio's POV/uses for different Configuration Managers
- Explain CM's pros and cons

</div></div>


 
