# The Maven Way

This section is designed to give you an introduction to Maven with a focus on the Maven approach of software building, package handling, and more.

### Introductory Reading

Starting out, you should read the following articles.
 - [Maven in 5 Minutes](https://maven.apache.org/guides/getting-started/maven-in-five-minutes.html)
 - [Introduction to the POM](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-pom.html)
 - [Introduction to the Dependency Mechanism](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-dependency-mechanism.html)
 - [Introduction to the Build Lifecycle](https://maven.apache.org/guides/introduction/introduction-to-the-lifecycle.html)

Read about [The Maven Way](https://www.cloudbees.com/blog/maven-way%E2%84%A2) over at cloudbees.com.

>"Ant is simply a toolbox whereas Maven is about the application of patterns in order to achieve an infrastructure which displays the characteristics of visibility, reusability, maintainability, and comprehensibility."
>
> \- [Philosophy of Maven, maven.apache.org](https://maven.apache.org/background/philosophy-of-maven.html)

### Convention over Configuration

A key concept of The Maven Way is convention over configuration. Convention over configuration refers to the idea that sticking to the standard way of doing a build with maven will be relatively painless, but if you do something outside the norm it is possible(but difficult requiring a lot of configuration).

A pom.xml does not require much in order to do a lot of powerful build commands in the Maven Lifecycle. This is possible due to the Convention over configuration principal Maven has an idea of where to put and look for most of the stuff it needs and assumes you placed everything properly.

### Maven Lifecycle

Maven has a simple, standard lifecycle.

 - **validate** - validate the project is correct and all necessary information is available
 - **compile** - compile the source code of the project
 - **test** - test the compiled source code using a suitable unit testing framework. These tests should not require the code be packaged or deployed
 - **package** - take the compiled code and package it in its distributable format, such as a JAR
 - **verify** - run any checks on results of integration tests to ensure quality criteria are met
 - **install** - install the package into the local repository, for use as a dependency in other projects locally
 - **deploy** - done in the build environment, copies the final package to the remote repository for sharing with other developers and projects

Each of these stages happens one after the other, in serial order. This means that when mvn package is ran, Maven also runs validate, compile and test. By using this standard lifecycle, Maven reinforces the notion of convention over customization. This allows any developer to expect that with any Maven project you will have these stages, making the build process globally straightforward.

### Group, Artifact, Version

Maven has a simple convention for uniquely identifying [artifacts.](https://maven.apache.org/guides/mini/guide-naming-conventions.html) There are 3 things that need to be defined, GAV:

 - **groupId** - identify your project uniquely across all projects, so we need to enforce a naming schema.
 - **artifactId** - name of the jar without version. If you created it then you can choose whatever name you want with lowercase letters and no strange symbols.
 - **version** - if you distribute it then you can choose any typical version with numbers and dots (1.0, 1.1, 1.0.1, ...). Don't use dates as they are usually associated with SNAPSHOT (nightly) builds.



```xml
<groupId>org.springframwork.samples</groupId>
<artifactId>spring-petclinic</artifactId>
<version>1.0.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
```

# Deliverable

Discuss the significance of the POM, dependencies and where they are sourced, and versions from a Maven perspective with your group.
