---
docs/3-AI-Engineering/3.1.4-ai-best-practices.md:
  category: AI Engineering
  estReadingMinutes: 10
---

# Best Practices for AI Engineering

AI is a major asset in increasing the velocity of engineering tasks. It also, however, requires a level of care and purposeful application to ensure that the output is of high quality and aligns with the goals of the project.

This section will outline some best practices for using AI tools in your development workflow so you can utilize it effectively while avoiding common pitfalls.

## AI Best Practices

- Do not blindly use code that it gives you. Take time to read through any examples you are given and understand what it does. The AI model may not be using up-to-date information when it is helping you, or can even hallucinate nonexistent code as truth, so you should only trust code that you are able to back up with your own knowledge or by checking against relevant documentation.
- To get more accurate information, specify any context that you want the bot to have. The more information it has, the better results it will be able to return for your use case. This includes providing relevant code snippets, error messages, desired outcomes, and constraints.
- Be aware that chat tools are not always reliable, and the results of what it gives you are never guaranteed. You should never let AI have the final say on handling sensitive or valuable information or infrastructure.
- Don't depend on long lived chats. As you talk to a chat bot for longer, it will continue to take note of your unique situation, however, this can lead to hallucinations that take priority over knowledge from the internet. It is important to be aware of how long your chats are living, and start fresh ones if you feel that the data you are getting is less factual and tailored too much to your own code.
- Be aware of what these tools are doing with your data. You should only use tools that will use your data ethically. Some organizations may prohibit the use of AI tools entirely, or only use internal chat bots, to protect the integrity of potentially sensitive data that they are handling. Always check your organization's policy.
- AI is only as smart as the internet it is trained on. Chat bots are essentially just a powerful, opinionated google search, and can only give you information from someone on the internet, but likely will not be able to check the validity of the claims it gives you. It is a good habit to verify anything you get from a chat bot before deciding to use it.

## Deliverables

- Consider some potential pitfalls of using AI tools in your development workflow, and how you can avoid them.
- Think of ways you can utilize AI enhanced development to make your work more efficient.
- While working through the rest of the chapter—and the rest of the Bootcamp as a whole—be conscientious of patterns that improve or worsen AI driven engineering.
