---
docs/7-infrastructure-configuration-management/7.1.2-terraform-backends.md:
  category: Infrastructure as Code
  estReadingMinutes: 20
  exercises:
    -
      name: Sharing Terraform Workspaces
      description: Learn how to share a Terraform workspace with your teammates and understand the role of `terraform.lock.hcl`.
      estMinutes: 60
      technologies:
      - Terraform
      - Terraform Cloud
      - GitHub
    -
      name: Cloud Native Backends
      description: Transition from using Terraform Cloud to using cloud native storage solutions for storing Terraform state.
      estMinutes: 120
      technologies:
      - Terraform
      - AWS S3
      - Azure Resource Manager
    -
      name: Terraform CI/CD Automation
      description: Create a CI/CD pipeline that enforces the main branch as the source of truth for the state of the Terraform.
      estMinutes: 420
      technologies:
      - Terraform
      - GitHub Actions
---


# Terraform State & Backends

## Sharing workspaces

In the last tutorial from the previous section you learned how to use Terraform Cloud to store a Terraform state remotely. Using remote states makes it possible for teams to share and create automation for Terraform workspaces. In the following exercises, work with your teammates to get a better understanding of how to share a Terraform workspace.

1. Create a GitHub repository for your Terraform and push up your code. You should only include your `.tf` and `.terraform.lock.hcl`.

2. Working with a teammate, have them clone your repo, make a change to your Terraform, apply it and push the change up to your repo.

?> Watch the state of the workspace in the Terraform Cloud as they apply the change

3. Run `terraform plan` with your original configuration. Now pull down your teammates changes and run `terraform plan` again then observe the difference.

**Deep Dive**

- What is the purpose of the `terraform.lock.hcl` file and why should it be included in the source repo?

## Cloud native backends

Terraform Cloud has a lot of features and is the foundation for Terraform Enterprise. But there are lots of other Terraform backends available for storing your state remotely. Let's take a look at using some cloud native storage solutions.

If you ran through the AWS tutorial use the [S3 backend](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/settings/backends/s3) for this exercise. For the Azure tutorial use the [azurerm backend](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/settings/backends/azurerm).

!> Terraform has not implemented state migration from Terraform Cloud to another backend so you will need to clean up the previous state with the following steps

1. Run `terraform destroy` to remove existing resources.

2. Delete the `.terraform` folder.

3. Create cloud resources to store the Terraform state in. The specific resources you need will depend on the cloud platform and backend you are using. Read the documentation for the specific backend and Terraform resources for more information.

4. Remove the `cloud` configuration block from the `terraform` block of your Terraform configuration.

5. Add a `backend` configuration block to the `terraform` block for your backend. The backend configuration should reference the resources you created in step #3.

6. Run `terraform init` and `terraform apply` to initialize the new backend and apply the configuration.

7. Look at the cloud storage you setup for the Terraform backend. What files have been created and what do they contain?

8. Push up your changes and have a teammate pull down your changes and apply a change

?> They may need additional access to the resources you've created depending on the platform you are using and what default permission they have.

**Deep Dive**

- What is stored in the Terraform state?

- What are some pros/cons of using Terraform Cloud to store Terraform state vs another backend?

**Automation**

Sharing a Terraform workspace is important for teams to be able to manage infrastructure. This can also cause problems if different members of the team apply changes before they are merged into a main branch in source control. One way to avoid this is to create CI/CD pipelines to test and apply change and enforce that the main branch is your source of truth for the state of the Terraform.

1. Create a GitHub workflow for your repo that triggers when a pull request to the main branch is created or updated that runs `terraform fmt`, `terraform init`, `terraform validate` and `terraform plan`.

?> You will need to configuring the GitHub runner environment so it can authenticate with the cloud provider and has the correct permission

!> Do not commit authentication credentials to your source repository

2. Ensure that the pipeline triggers when you create a PR and that all of your Terraform checks work as expected.

3. Create a second workflow that is triggered when a commit is pushed to the main branch that runs `terraform init` and `terraform apply`

4. Ensure that merging changes into your main branch will trigger the workflow and that changes are applied to your Terraform state.

5. Have one of your teammates make a change to your Terraform configuration and merge it into the main branch.
