---
docs/7-infrastructure-configuration-management/7.2-ansible.md:
  category: Infrastructure as Code
  estReadingMinutes: 15
  exercises:
    -
      name: Vagrant and Ansible
      description: Provision a virtual machine and install a GitHub self-hosted runner using Ansible as a provisioner in Vagrant.
      estMinutes: 300
      technologies:
      - Ansible
      - Vagrant
      - GitHub self-hosted runner
    -
      name: Idempotency
      description: Provision a virtual machine and install a GitHub self-hosted runner using Ansible as a provisioner in Vagrant while maintaining idempotency.
      estMinutes: 300
      technologies:
      - Ansible
      - Vagrant
      - GitHub self-hosted runner
    -
      name: Ansible and AWS EC2
      description: Provision an AWS EC2 instance and install a GitHub self-hosted runner using Ansible.
      estMinutes: 300
      technologies:
      - Ansible
      - AWS EC2
      - GitHub self-hosted runner
    -
      name: Terraform and Ansible
      description: Provision an EC2 instance using Terraform and install a GitHub self-hosted runner with Ansible.
      estMinutes: 360
      technologies:
      - Terraform
      - Ansible
      - AWS EC2
      - GitHub self-hosted runner
---

# Ansible

Ansible has many use cases including provisioning, configuration management, application deployment, continuous delivery, security & compliance and orchestration.

It uses easy to write configuration files to run these operations which lets enterprises manage infrastructure & configuration as code in version control.

Ansible runs locally and does not need a centralized service to manage its state. It use SSH to connect to remote hosts execute commands so it doesn't need an agent to be installed. This makes lightweight and easy to start using but may suffer some performance loss compared to similar tools.

## Using Ansible

Ansible has a lot of specific terminology and possible use cases which can be overwhelming at first. We will cover what we consider to be the most important information to get started.

### Inventory

An Ansible inventory defines the hosts and optionally groups of hosts which can be referenced in playbooks. By default Ansible looks in */etc/ansible/hosts* for the inventory but you can specify a different inventory file by using `-i <path>` with most commands.

Here is a sample inventory YAML file:

```yml
all:
  hosts:
    mail.example.com:
  children:
    webservers:
      hosts:
        foo.example.com:
        bar.example.com:
    dbservers:
      hosts:
        one.example.com:
        two.example.com:
        three.example.com:
```

This inventory defines a host called *mail.example.com*, a group called *webservers* which has the hosts *foo.example.com* and *bar.example.com* and a group called *dbservers* which as the hosts *one.example.com*, *two.example.com* and *three.example.com*.

### Playbooks

Playbooks are the steps Ansible will take to provision, configure and deploy applications written as YAML documents. They can be a simple list of tasks to automate or complicated sets of modular tasks describing the orchestration of an entire environment. We will cover the necessities to get started creating playbooks in this section.

Let's examine a simple playbook to get started.

```yml
---
- hosts: webservers #(1)
  remote_user: root #(2)

  tasks:
  - name: ensure apache is at the latest version #(3)
    yum: #(4)
      name: httpd
      state: latest
  - name: write the apache config file #(5)
    template:
      src: /srv/httpd.j2
      dest: /etc/httpd.conf

- hosts: databases #(6)
  remote_user: root

  tasks:
  - name: ensure postgresql is at the latest version
    yum:
      name: postgresql
      state: latest
  - name: ensure that postgresql is started
    service:
      name: postgresql
      state: started
```

This playbook executes several tasks in two *plays*. Note lines with commented out numbers which are referenced below.

1. This line starts our first *play* and the hosts from our inventory that it will be applied to.
2. This is the user that Ansible will use to connect to the host as via SSH and execute commands as.
3. Here we start our first task. The task name is used to describe what are task does in Ansible's output.
4. Here we are using the yum *module* for our task. The 2 lines following are parameters for the *module* which define httpd as package for yum to install. We will explain modules in more detail below.
5. This line starts our 2nd task. Note that it is using a different *module*.
6. This line starts our 2nd *play* which targets a different group of hosts.

You can read more about playbooks at [Ansible.com: Working With Playbooks](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks.html).

#### Privilege Escalation

Notice above we are connecting to our hosts as root. Allowing SSH connections as root is considered a security risk but to manage our hosts Ansible needs to be able to execute commands as a privileged user. To solve this problem we can connect to our host as a normal user which has sudo privileges and tell Ansible when it needs to escalate privileges. Consider the following example:

```yml
- hosts: webservers
  remote_user: bob #(1)
  tasks:
  - name: ensure apache is at the latest version
    become: yes #(2)
    yum:
      name: httpd
      state: latest
```

1. Here we are connecting as a normal user.
2. Here we tell Ansible to run the task as root. Note: you can also specify *become* as part of the *play* to set the default for all of the tasks in that *play*.

You can read more about privilege escalation at [Ansible.com: Understanding Privilege Escalation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/become.html).

#### Running Playbooks

To run a playbook simply run `ansible-playbook playbook.yml` where playbook.yml is your playbook file.

### Modules

Modules encapsulate a single repeatable, configurable action such as controlling system resources, executing a command or making an API request. Modules can be executed directly but are usually used in playbooks where each task defines a module to use and the parameters for that module.

Ansible comes with over [1300 modules](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/list_of_all_modules.html) which makes it easy write tasks for just about anything. If a module does not exist for a specific task there are lower level modules for executing commands, managing system resources and making requests directly or you can write your own modules.

Modules also serve another purpose in that they check the state of a host to decide what, if any, action needs to be taken. This make playbooks simpler to write and also speeds them up by not repeating unnecessary actions.

### Playbook variables, templates and roles

You should be able to start writing basic playbooks with what you've learned so far. To write more advanced playbooks that are modular and reusable you'll need to understand some more advanced concepts.

#### Variables

Variables let you define values which can be used throughout your playbook to make it easier to reuse it for different hosts or environments. Variables can be defined in your inventory, playbook or can be imported from files. Read more about [variables](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html).

#### Templates

Ansible uses Jinja2 to create templates which can be used by your playbook tasks or can be copied onto your hosts. Jinja2 can incorporate variable values and has a variety of filters to generate the template content. Read more about [templates](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_templating.html).

#### Roles

Roles let you organize you playbook in a more modular way by grouping task, variables, templates and other Ansible structures together. Read more about [roles](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_reuse_roles.html).

### Conclusion

We have only covered a small portion of Ansible's use cases and concepts. You should also look over the [official documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/) and refer back to it working through the exercises.

## Exercises

You will be using Ansible to install a GitHub self-hosted runner to a variety of hosting platforms. The installation directions (commands, zip downloads, etc) for a GitHub self-hosted runner are provided by GitHub through the setup prompts in a repository's settings. Please follow [this GitHub guide](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/hosting-your-own-runners/managing-self-hosted-runners/adding-self-hosted-runners#adding-a-self-hosted-runner-to-a-repository) to navigate to the install directions.

?> For the following exercises, you will need to choose a GitHub repository to work with. It is recommended to use a repo you created from previous exercises.

## 1. Exercise - Vagrant and Ansible

For this exercise you will use Ansible as a provisioner in Vagrant to setup a new virtual machine and install the a GitHub self-hosted runner.

1. Install Ansible `brew install ansible`.
2. Write an Ansible playbook to install a GitHub self-hosted runner.
3. Follow [this](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/scenario_guides/guide_vagrant.html) guide to use the playbook as a Vagrant provisioner.
4. Run a GitHub workflow using the newly provisioned GitHub self-hosted runner.

## 2. Exercise - Ansible and Idempotency

Depending on your implementation of the previous exercise, your playbook may or may not be considered **idempotent**.

Idempotency is a concept in both mathematics and computer science that indicates a given mathematical operation or function can be applied multiple times and yield the same result. An example of this in mathematics could be `x + 0`. No matter how many times you add `0` to `x`, the result will always be `x`.

More relevantly, in order for an Ansible playbook to be idempotent, it must be able to be run repeatedly and yield the same result each time. Generally, most Ansible modules are idempotent, only making changes when a system is not in line with the specified desired state, but there are some that aren't, notably the command and shell modules.

1. Recreate exercise 1 with idempotency in mind.
>Some potentially helpful resources for making your playbook idempotent:
>
>[Ansible handlers](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_handlers.html#handlers)
>
>[Self-Hosted runners as a service](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_handlers.html#handlers)

2. Ensure you can successfully rerun your playbook using `vagrant provision`, and that doing so results in the same configuration as running it only once.

For the following exercises, try to challenge yourself by making each of your following playbooks idempotent.

## 3. Exercise - Ansible and AWS EC2

Provisioning local virtual machines is good practice but now let move onto something more practical. In this exercise you will provision and AWS EC2 instance and install a GitHub self-hosted runner.

1. Follow [this](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/scenario_guides/guide_aws.html) guide to adapt your playbook to provision an EC2 instance and then install a GitHub self-hosted runner.
2. Run a GitHub workflow using the newly provisioned GitHub self-hosted runner.

## 4. Exercise - Terraform and Ansible

Ansible can do a lot of different things but it is not always the best tool for every use case. It is common to combine different tools to use the advantages of each.

In this exercise you will use Terraform to provision and EC2 instance and then Ansible to install a GitHub self-hosted runner.

1. Use what you learned in the previous section to provision an EC2 instance.
2. Update your playbook to install a GitHub self-hosted runner on your EC2 instance.
3. Use a `local-exec` provisioner to run `ansible-playbook` from Terraform.
4. Run a GitHub workflow using the newly provisioned GitHub self-hosted runner.

## Deliverable

- Discuss examples of each of Ansible's use cases.
- Discuss the similarity and differences between Ansible and other tools discussed so far in this chapter.
