# Container Management

From the previous section, you should be familiar with using Docker to build containers and run them locally. As environments grow and become more complicated running containers individually and configuring them using command line arguments becomes too difficult to manage. In production environments scaling, monitoring and security also become essential elements to managing containerized applications.

Aside from managing the containers themselves, there are some resources they depend on which must also be managed.

- **Volumes**: A container is created with a layered file system that can add, delete and modify files, from the image it was created with, without actually changing the image. When the container is deleted, any logs, configurations or data which was written to the filesystem will be lost. Volumes provide a way to mount external storage to a directory in the container's filesystem which persists after the container is deleted and can be mounted again in another container.

- **Network**: When you run a container using Docker it is added to a default bridged network. Docker has other network types (similar to the networks in VMWare) and can group different containers into different networks. When containers are spread out across different hosts or networks additional network layers are needed to allow containers to communicate with each other and outside their own network.

- **CPU / Memory**: While CPU and memory are very different types of resources they are often handled the same because they are both finite resources limited by the container's host. Managing CPU and memory usage is essential to ensure individual containers perform well and do not interfere with other containers running on the same host.

---

In this section, we will be looking at two different container management solutions. Both solutions have very different use cases and should help you understand the challenges of running containers in simple and complicated environments.

1. **Docker Compose** is an application that can manage building and running multiple Docker containers using a simple interface.

2. **Kubernetes** is a robust framework that manages complicated container environments in a uniform way regardless of whether it is running on a single machine or a cluster of VMs in a cloud provider.
