---
docs/6-release-management/6.1-versioning.md:
  category: Version Control
  estReadingMinutes: 5
  exercises:
    -
      name: Docker Image Versioning
      description: Build a few docker images and play with tagging them with semantic versioning.
      estMinutes: 30
      technologies:
      - Docker
---

# Versioning

A version is more than just something marketing departments use to hype up a new release of a product. A version represents a specific snapshot of the codebase which can be used to track features, identify changes that introduce bugs and for meaningful feedback to make its way back to developers. Meaningful versions allow software to be tested in different environment before being deployed to production and for a release to be rolled back if there are problems.

## Semantic Versioning

Versions can also be used as a shorthand to convey information about the scope of changes in a release. Read about Semantic Versioning at [semver.org](http://semver.org/). Most software projects have dependencies on libraries written outside of that project. Being able easily differentiate bug and security fixes from new features or breaking changes makes managing those upstream dependencies much easier. Similarly many software platforms rely on an ecosystem of different software projects in which must track how changes in one project affect the others.

## Exercise

1. Create a Dockerfile to build a simple image which outputs some text when run.
2. Build your image and make sure to use a semantic version as a tag for the image name. See the [docker CLI reference](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/build/#tag-an-image--t) for information on image tags.
3. Run your new image using the image tag.
4. Update your image to change the output text.
5. Build a new image using a new semantic version tag.
6. Run your new image. Now run your old image.

?> What happens when you build an image without a tag?

?> If you did not tag your images what would you have to do to run the old image?

## Deliverables

Find some open source projects and look at how they use versions. Discuss as a group how effective the projects you find are at using version.
