---
docs/6-release-management/6.3.1-docker.md:
  category: Container Orchestration
  estReadingMinutes: 10
  exercises:
    -
      name: Dockerhub Exercise
      description: Create a Dockerhub account, create repositories, clone DevOps Knowledge Share repositories, build container images, push them to Dockerhub, create a Docker Compose file, and create a GitHub Actions Workflow.
      estMinutes: 360
      technologies:
      - Docker
      - Dockerhub
      - GitHub
      - GitHub Actions
---

# Container Registries

Similar to more traditional software artifacts, containerized application images are usually deployed to a centralized repository when they are released. From the repository they can be deployed into runtime environments or consumed as dependencies for other applications.

## Docker Hub

[Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/) is the defacto default container registry for Docker and Dockers OCI compliant image registry for storing, versioning, and distributing container images. This means that commands such as `docker pull org/image:tag` and `docker push org/image:tag` will by default pull/push to Docker Hub. Even though Docker Hub is the world's largest container registry, it is just one of many OCI compliant registries available. Other popular image registries are GitHub Container Registry (GHCR), Amazon ECR, or Google Artifact Registry.

## GitHub Container Registry

[GitHub Container Registry](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-container-registry) is a powerful alternative to Docker Hub, particularly for teams using GitHub for their codebase. GHCR allows you to store and manage Docker images directly within GitHub, where each image is tied to a specific repository. This means you can manage container images alongside your code, creating a unified workflow for development and deployment.

When pushing an image to GHCR, the image is associated with a GitHub repository and can be versioned, tagged, and accessed based on the repository’s visibility settings. For example, public repositories can expose images to anyone, while private repositories restrict access based on user permissions. Additionally, GHCR integrates smoothly with GitHub Actions, enabling you to automate image builds, tests, and deployments within your CI/CD pipeline.

## Exercise

1. Fork the two DevOps Knowledge Share repositories from before, the [UI](https://github.com/liatrio/dks-ui) and [API](https://github.com/liatrio/dks-api).

2. Using two different `Dockerfiles` build two container images. Make sure to [tag](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/tag/) the images using semantic versioning.

> **_Note:_** Be sure to add the environment variable "KNOWLEDGE_SHARE_API" to the UI container with the value of the API container's URL. Another option is to add it to the Docker compose file mentioned below.

?> You can tag a Docker image in the same step as the build.

3. From your command line, [manually push](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/working-with-a-github-packages-registry/working-with-the-container-registry#pushing-container-images) both images to GHCR.

?> When you push a container image from the command line, the image is not linked to a repository by default. This is the case even if you tag the image with a namespace that matches the name of the repository, such as ghcr.io/liatrio/my-repo:latest.

4. Create a `Docker Compose` to be able to connect the frontend and the backend.

?> Although this example project does not include an external database to configure, take some time to look at one like MongoDB and how to configure it in a Docker Compose file.

5. Create a GitHub Actions Workflow to automatically build and push your images to your GHCR.

?> You can advance your Self-Hosted GitHub Actions runner from previous chapters to be able to run Docker in Docker, however this is a more complex task.  It is worth knowing how to do, but it is also worth knowing how to use existing actions from the GitHub Actions ecosystem.

6. Pull the images from your repositories and build them using your `Docker Compose` file from earlier. Verify everything works as expected by visiting the front end in your browser.

# Deliverables

- Discuss the benefits of using a container registry, and how image releases work.

- Discuss the differences between Docker Hub and GHCR.

- Discuss use cases for public vs private container repositories.
