---
docs/2-Github/2.3-Projects.md:
  category: Agile Development
  estReadingMinutes: 5
  exercises:
    - name: Create your own Project
      description: Play around with GitHub Projects and get used to using its many features and interfaces to organize your work.
      estMinutes: 80
      technologies:
      - GitHub Projects
---
# GitHub Projects

 Projects are an indispensable tool when it comes to organizing your work within the GitHub ecosystem and they come with many features that are immediately obvious like cards, views, repo connected issues, etc while others are more behind the scenes like the build-in automation and additional automation functionality brought in by the GraphQL API. In this section we will be working with GitHub Projects in order to create a board for us to use with different views along with some automation.

## Exercise 1

1. Create a new project board: To create a new project board, click on the "Projects" tab in your GitHub repository, and then click on the "New project" button. You can then choose a template for your board or create one from scratch.
2. Add columns: Once you've created your project board, you can add columns to organize your tasks. For example, if you didn't create the project from any of the provided templates, you might have columns for "To do," "In progress," and "Done."
3. Create custom fields: By default the project board comes with a "Status" field with a few options to create columns for and map cards to.  Create an additional field with options to group information in a different way than what you get out of the box.  Add an additional view using this new field and add a filter to aggregate data for one specific part of your project.
4. Create cards: Within each column, you can create cards for specific tasks or issues. Cards can include information such as a title, description, labels, and assignees. You can also drag and drop cards between columns as they progress through your workflow.
5. Use automation: GitHub Projects includes automation features that can help you save time and streamline much of the organizational process. For example, you can set up rules to automatically move cards between columns based on certain criteria, such as when a task is assigned or when a label is added.  One cool feature is being able to automatically add items to your Project based on criteria like item type, label, status of the item, etc so your Project will always be reflective of the work going on in your repo/organization.  These can be enabled/disabled within each Project.

## Knowledge Check

<div class="quizdown">
  <div id="chapter-2/2.3/projects-quiz.js"></div>
</div>

## Deliverables

- Look into some basic functionality of Projects as well as get used to navigating its various menus and views
- Be able to create your own Project with meaningful organization and ways to target specific data from your issues and cards.
- Be able to work with some of the build-in automation in order to streamline many of the common actions you'd do within Projects
