---
docs/2-Github/2.4-APIs.md:
  category: Fundamentals
  estReadingMinutes: 30
  exercises:
    - name: Interact with GitHub using its two available APIs
      description: Create and retrieve resources in GitHub using the REST and GraphQL APIs.  Get some experience using them and compare the two approaches.
      estMinutes: 180
      technologies:
      - APIs
      - Javascript
---

# The GitHub API's

 GitHub has two different API's available in order to make automating many of the processes you do regularly inside of GitHub far easier.  The two API's you can use are the REST and GraphQL API's which do many of the same things but also have their share of resources that only they can manage.  Which of the two you will need depends on your use case as well as what you are more comfortable using.

## REST API

 The REST API is the much older of the two as well as is the one you will have most likely seen before in other contexts. It tends to be much easier to navigate than the GraphQL one but is much less flexible. The full documentation for GitHub's REST API is [here](https://docs.github.com/en/rest?apiVersion=2022-11-28)

## GraphQL API

 This API is the newer of the two API's and uses a much different system to gather data and act on your requests as well as give you the option to condense your queries into single requests at the cost of a bit of setup.

 When you request data on a resource in the more traditional REST API, it gives you a bunch of json data that you have to then sift through to find what you want.  GraphQL is different in that you are able to request exactly what you need about the resource in question, making queries quite a bit cleaner.

 Another difference is the way their rate-limits are setup, and for those who don't know, the API's include certain limits on the amount of requests you can make depending on the type of GitHub tier you are on.  The reason they have different systems here is because with GraphQL you can have one request that would be equivalent to 100 REST API calls because you are able make multiple queries in each one.  GraphQL uses a points system that is determined by the amount of nodes you are visiting in order to calculate the appropriate rate cost.

 The best way to interact with the GraphQL API is through the use of GitHub's [GraphQL Explorer](https://docs.github.com/en/graphql/overview/explorer) or similar products so you can find exactly what you are looking for and generate the corresponding query without having to sift through the somewhat confusing docs to craft a query you don't even know will work.

## Exercise 1

 We are going to use the GraphQL and REST API's to interact with GitHub, specifically for making repos, projects, and issues.  There are many ways to interact with the API's, in our case we will be creating a node.js module in order to take advantage of [octokit](https://github.com/octokit/octokit.js) which is a GitHub maintained client for interacting with their API's. The first thing you'll want to do is navigate to the explorer page for the GraphQL API mentioned above as well as have the docs for the REST API open which if you didn't notice before, offers examples of how to interact with the API with curl, the cli, as well as javascript with octokit.

#### With the REST API

 1. Within your organization create a private repository with issues and projects enabled and add a description of your choosing
 2. Create a pull request and an issue with just a simple title and body inside that repository
 3. Get and display the repository you created, as well as the the issue and pull request you made inside of it.

 >Pretty simple right?  One thing you should take note of is how many requests you have to use to accomplish all of this as well as what each of them returns to you.

#### With the GraphQL API

The documentation on how to do GraphQL queries with octokit can easily be confusing and different sources have different ways of doing it, so here is an example of a good way to go about it. If you are using GitHub's GraphQL explorer, you can pretty much just replace whats inside the backticks following the `query:` parameter with your own query or mutation. The explorer also will usually give the query a name when creating new ones there which doesn't influence the query should you include it or not, as you can see the example does not.

```javascript
//This function gets the name and id of an organization as well as the id and title of one of the projects it owns.
//The owner parameter is the name of the organization.
async function getOrgAndProject(owner, projectNumber, token){
  const response = await octokit.graphql({query: `query{
      organization(login: "${owner}") {
        projectV2(number: ${projectNumber}) {
          id
          title
        }
        name
        id
      }
    }`,
    headers: {
    'X-GitHub-Api-Version': '2022-11-28',
    'Authorization':`token ${token}`
    }
  })
}
```

 1. Now repeat all the above steps but this time use the GraphQL API.
 2. In addition to that, create a new projectV2 and link it to the repo

 >Notice there are still problems you'll need to use multiple queries for, like ones that return information you need for other requests, however the total amount of requests you make shrinks drastically as well as the amount of information returned.  On top of that there are things only the GraphQL api can do like create and manage projectsV2

## Knowledge Check

<div class="quizdown">
  <div id="chapter-2/2.4/api-quiz.js"></div>
</div>

## Deliverables

- Feel comfortable managing GitHub resources through its API's as well as be able to find information should you need to.
- Be aware of the differences between the REST and GraphQL API's and when its more appropriate to use one over the other.
- Get a little experience with tools like `Octokit`
