---
docs/2-Github/2.2-Actions.md:
  category: AI Tools
  estReadingMinutes: 10
---
# Using AI Tools to Enhance Development

In modern development, the use of AI tools is becoming more and more of an encouraged practice.  They help to write, explain, and review code based on existing sources on the internet.

It’s important to note that AI tools are not capable of thinking, and are only trying to imitate what they have seen from the internet.  You should never trust anything it gives you without verifying it somehow first.

## Best practices using AI:

- Do not blindly use code that it gives you.  Take time to read through any examples you are given and understand what it does.  The AI model may not be using up-to-date information when it is helping you, or can even hallucinate nonexistent code as truth, so you should only trust code that you are able to back up with your own knowledge or by checking against relevant documentation.
- To get more accurate information, specify any context that you want the bot to have.  The more information it has, the better results it will be able to return for your use case.
- Be aware that chat tools are not always reliable, and the results of what it gives you are never guaranteed.  You should never let AI have the final say on handling sensitive or valuable information or infrastructure.
- Don’t depend on long lived chats.  As you talk to a chat bot for longer, it will continue to take note of your unique situation, however, this can lead to hallucinations that take priority over knowledge from the internet.  It is important to be aware of how long your chats are living, and start fresh ones if you feel that the data you are getting is less factual and tailored too much to your own code.
- Be aware of what these tools are doing with your data.  You should only use tools that will use your data ethically.  Some organizations may prohibit the use of AI tools entirely, or only use internal chat bots, to protect the integrity of potentially sensitive data that they are handling.
- AI is only as smart as the internet it is trained on.  Chat bots are essentially just a powerful, opinionated google search, and can only give you information from someone on the internet, but likely will not be able to check the validity of the claims it gives you.  It is a good habit to verify anything you get from a chat bot before deciding to use it.

## AI Tools you may use:

- ChatGPT
  - Free to use, so most devs now have some familiarity with it
  - What most AI assistants are based on
- Copilot
  - Most features need a paid account- as a student you can
  - ChatGPT trained off of public GitHub
  - Lives in your IDE or on GitHub
  - Can read everything in your workspace
  - You can use commands with /, extensions with @ or refer to sources with #
- Windsurf
  - Like Copilot + agentic interaction
  - Has its own IDE
- Claude AI
  - Similar to Copilot, and comes standard with the Zed IDE
  - Uses its own model instead of OpenAI

And many more!

The landscape of AI tools is constantly changing, and there are always more being added to software that you may use day-to-day, so its always worth taking some time to play with them and see what value they have to offer.

# Deliverables

- How do AI tools contribute to your coding environment?
- How do you use these tools to get usable information?
