# Highlighting Githubs Features/Services

## Issues

   Github Issues is a ticketing feature designed to help you and others keep track of general to-do's on your repo (Future features, bug-fixes, etc).  Within these
   you are able to include things like:

- Labels to quickly see what the issue is related with a small tag and a corresponding color
- The person assigned to the ticket if any as well as who created the ticket
- Milestones in order to keep track of progress on that specific issue
- Linked project which is another feature of github

## Actions

   Github Actions is Github's system for pipelines and automation.  It allows you to do things like:

- Create workflow files in your repo to perform specific actions on a trigger like build your app, run tests, and integrate with other Github features
     as well as 3rd party services
- Promoting code-reuse by letting you create custom actions which can be thought of as reusable scripts at a high level which you
     can make private or public so others in the community can use them.
- Create reusable workflows to bundle together many actions together for a more specific scenario then what you may create a single action for.

## Projects

   Github Projects is an organizational tool that integrates with Github Issues to track your work more effectively. With it you can:

- Create Kanban boards or tables to collect tickets on whether they be drafts or issues directly linked to a repo
- Create sub-sections in your board or table to organize your work into states like "To-do", "In-Progress", or "Done" as well as whatever else you may find useful
- Create custom views in order to sort on a specific field to extract as much effective data from your project as possible.  Much like a pivot table for those who know what that is.
- Create Roadmaps (in public beta) in order to add a visual timeframe element to your project and related issues.

## Pages

   Github Pages is a feature that allows you to publish a website based on HTML, CSS, and Javascript available in your repository

## Security

   Github has various security tools to keep your repo safe and up to date:

- Dependabot to automatically alert you to out of date packages and dependencies and update them should the feature be enabled
- Should you have an Advanced Security license, you get access to code scanning which analyses code in your repo to check for vulnerabilities and code
     errors, secret scanning which checks to see if things like tokens and private keys were pushed to your repo, and lastly dependency review which shows
     the impact of a pull request on your dependencies so you catch vulnerabilities before you introduce them.

## API

   Github's REST and GraphQL API's give you access to view, create, delete, and update most of the resources you'd interact with on Github through requests
   to the API's url
