# The Github API's

 Github has two different API's available in order to make automating many of the processes you do regularly inside of Github far easier.  The two API's you can use are the REST and GraphQL API's which do many of the same things but also have their share of resources that only they can manage.  Which of the two you will need depends on your use case as well as what you are more comfortable using.

## REST API

 The REST API is the much older of the two as well as is the one you will have most likely seen before in other contexts.  

## GraphQL API

 This API is the newer of the two API's and uses a much different system to gather data and act on your requests as well as give you the option to condense your queries into single requests at the cost of a bit of setup.  

 Whereas in the more traditional REST API when you request data on a resource, it gives you a bunch of json data that you have to then sift through to find what you want.  GraphQL is different in that you are able to request exactly what you need about the resource in question, making queries quite a bit cleaner.

 Another difference lies in the way their rate-limits are setup and for those who don't know, the API's include certain limits on the amount of requests you can make depending on the type of Github tier you are on.  The reason they have different systems here is because with GraphQL you can have one request that would be equivalent to 100 REST API calls because you are able make multiple queries in each one.  GraphQL uses a points system that is determined by the amount of nodes you are visiting in order to calculate the appropriate rate cost.

 The best way to interact with the GraphQL API is through the use of Github's [GraphQL Explorer](https://docs.github.com/en/graphql/overview/explorer) or similar products so you can find exactly what you are looking for and generate the corresponding query without having to sift through the somewhat confusing docs to craft a query you don't even know will work.
