# Azure Storage Accounts and CDN

In this section we will demonstrate how Azure Storage Accounts can be used to host a basic website, very similar to what you did in section 3.2.1 with S3 & CloudFront.

## Create an Angular site hosted on Azure Blob Storage

> An [Azure Storage Account](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/common/storage-account-overview) contains all of your Azure Storage data objects: blobs, files, queues, tables, and disks. The storage account provides a unique namespace for your Azure Storage data that is accessible from anywhere in the world over HTTP or HTTPS. Data in your Azure storage account is durable and highly available, secure, and massively scalable.

For this exercise we will host a basic website on Azure Blob Storage built using [Angular](https://angular.io/).

1. Install the Angular CLI.

```
npm install -g @angular/cli
```

2. Create a new Angular project.

```
ng new YOUR_NAME-web-app
```

?> You can just accept the defaults when creating the new project.

3. Run the Angular application locally. A new browser session should be launched and you will see your Angular application with all the defaults. Feel free to explore Angular and make some changes to your default project before moving on to the build step.

```
cd YOUR_NAME-web-app
ng serve --open
```

4. Build the Angular application. If the build is successful, your deployment files will be contained within the "dist" sub-directory in your Angular project.

```
ng build
```

5. Log into Azure CLI and select the correct subscription

```
az login
az account set --subscription "SUBSCRIPTION_NAME"
```

6. Create a resource group.

```
RESOURCE_GROUP=RG-YOUR_NAME-bootcamp
LOCATION=westus
az group create --name $RESOURCE_GROUP --location $LOCATION
```

?> Use environment variables for things like Resource Groups to avoid repeating yourself in subsequent steps.

7. Create the storage account.

```
STORAGE_ACCOUNT=YOUR_NAMEbasicwebsite123
az storage account create \
  --name $STORAGE_ACCOUNT \
  --resource-group $RESOURCE_GROUP \
  --location $LOCATION
```

?> Storage accounts in Azure have restrictions on naming. Lowercase and numbers only, no uppercase or special characters allowed!

8. Use [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com) to validate creation.

9. Enable static website hosting on the storage account

```
az storage blob service-properties update \
  --account-name $STORAGE_ACCOUNT  \
  --static-website \
  --404-document 404.html \
  --index-document index.html
```

10. Deploy the website

```
az storage blob upload-batch \
  --account-name $STORAGE_ACCOUNT  \
  -s ./dist/YOUR_NAME-web-app -d '$web'
```

11. Use Azure CLI or Azure Portal to find the URL for your storage account website. Save this URL to an environment variable named WEB_ORIGIN.

?>  The URL will follow the convention of accountname.regioncode.web.core.windows.net.

## Enable Azure CDN for the website

> [Azure Content Delivery Network](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cdn/cdn-overview) offers developers a global solution for rapidly delivering high-bandwidth content to users by caching their content at strategically placed physical nodes across the world. Azure CDN can also accelerate dynamic content, which cannot be cached, by leveraging various network optimizations using CDN POPs. For example, route optimization to bypass Border Gateway Protocol (BGP).

12. Create the Azure CDN profile for the website.

```bash
CDN_PROFILE=YOUR_NAMEcdnprofile123
az cdn profile create -n $CDN_PROFILE \
  --sku Standard_Microsoft \
  --resource-group $RESOURCE_GROUP
```

13. Create the Azure CDN endpoint for the website.

```bash
CDN_ENDPOINT=YOUR_NAMEcdnendpoint123
az cdn endpoint create -n $CDN_ENDPOINT \
  --resource-group $RESOURCE_GROUP \
  --profile-name $CDN_PROFILE \
  --origin $WEB_ORIGIN \
  --origin-host-header $WEB_ORIGIN \
  --enable-compression
```

14. Make sure you can reach the website using the Azure CDN endpoint.

?> It may take some time for the endpoint to become live.

15. Cleanup the resources you created by deleting the resource group.

```bash
az group delete -n $RESOURCE_GROUP
```
