# Azure Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS)

In this section we will demonstrate how Virtual Machine Scale Sets (VMSS) work in Azure. We will build upon the learnings from previous sections and use a VMSS to host our simple website. Web assets will be hosted from shared storage in an Azure Storage account. We will then generate some artificial load to make sure scaling is working as expected.

> [VM Scale Sets](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machine-scale-sets/overview) let you create and manage a group of load balanced VMs. The number of VM instances can automatically increase or decrease in response to demand or a defined schedule. Scale sets provide high availability to your applications, and allow you to centrally manage, configure, and update a large number of VMs. With virtual machine scale sets, you can build large-scale services for areas such as compute, big data, and container workloads.

## Create a VMSS and serve content from an Azure Storage Account

1. Log into Azure CLI and select the correct subscription.

2. Create a resource group for the VMSS and associated resources.

3. Create a new storage account and assign the name of the account to the environment variable STORAGE_ACCOUNT.

4. Get the primary storage access key for the storage account using Azure CLI and assign it to the environment variable STORAGE_KEY using query values. You can [look here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/storage/account?view=azure-cli-latest) to get started.

5. Use Azure CLI to create a file share in the storage account with a 1GB quota. Populate the environment variable SHARE_NAME with the name of your new file share.

6. Create a simple Node.js app that returns the hostname of the VM (same one we used in section 3.3.2).

```bash
mkdir /Users/YOUR_NAME/webapp
cat <<EOF > /Users/YOUR_NAME/webapp/index.js
var express = require('express')
var app = express()
var os = require('os');
app.get('/', function (req, res) {
  res.send('DevOps Bootcamp sample app running on host ' + os.hostname() + '!')
})
app.listen(3000, function () {
  console.log('Test app listening on port 3000!')
})
EOF
```

7. Build the Node.js app locally first. Launch it locally and make sure it works.

```bash
cd /Users/YOUR_NAME/webapp
npm init --yes
npm install express -y
```

8. Upload the Node.js app to Azure file share we created in step 5.

```bash
az storage file upload-batch \
  --account-key $STORAGE_KEY \
  --account-name $STORAGE_ACCOUNT \
  --destination $SHARE_NAME --source /Users/YOUR_NAME/webapp
```

9. Update the cloud-init script for VMSS. It now will mount Azure Files share containing our Node.js app and launch from that mount. This way multiple VMs can serve the same content from a central location.

```bash
cat <<EOF > /Users/YOUR_NAME/cloud-init-vmss.txt
#cloud-config
package_update: true
package_upgrade: true
packages:
  - nginx
  - nodejs
  - npm
write_files:
  - owner: www-data:www-data
  - path: /etc/nginx/sites-available/default
    content: |
      server {
        listen 80;
        location / {
          proxy_pass http://localhost:3000;
          proxy_http_version 1.1;
          proxy_set_header Upgrade \$http_upgrade;
          proxy_set_header Connection keep-alive;
          proxy_set_header Host \$host;
          proxy_cache_bypass \$http_upgrade;
        }
      }
runcmd:
  - mkdir "/mnt/webapp"
  - 'mount -t cifs //$STORAGE_ACCOUNT.file.core.windows.net/$SHARE_NAME /mnt/webapp -o vers=3.0,username=$STORAGE_ACCOUNT,password=$STORAGE_KEY,dir_mode=0755,file_mode=0664'
  - service nginx restart
  - cd "/mnt/webapp"
  - nodejs index.js
EOF
```

?> The above won't work unless you have properly setting environment variables for STORAGE_ACCOUNT, SHARE_NAME, and STORAGE_KEY.

10. Create a VMSS with Azure CLI that uses our updated cloud-init script. Use the same SSH keys you generated in section 3.3.2. Specify an instance count of 2 for the scale set. Use environment variable VMSS_NAME to hold the value for the name of the scale set.

?> It can take several minutes to provision the VMSS. For bonus points, deploy the VMSS with different VM SKU sizes and note the differences in deployment times.

11. When the VMSS was created, it automatically created a load balancer instance. Let's add a load balancing rule to it so we can reach our Node.js app.

```bash
az network lb rule create \
  --resource-group $RESOURCE_GROUP \
  --name myLoadBalancerRuleWeb \
  --lb-name "${VMSS_NAME}LB" \
  --backend-pool-name "${VMSS_NAME}LBBEPool" \
  --backend-port 80 \
  --frontend-ip-name loadBalancerFrontEnd \
  --frontend-port 80 \
  --protocol tcp
```

12. Get the public IP for load balancer and make sure we can reach the Node.js app using cURL. You should see responses from both instances in the scale set.

13. Create an autoscaling profile.

```bash
AUTOSCALE_PROFILE=YOUR_NAMEautoscaleprofile123
az monitor autoscale create \
  --resource-group $RESOURCE_GROUP \
  --resource $VMSS_NAME \
  --resource-type Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachineScaleSets \
  --name $AUTOSCALE_PROFILE \
  --min-count 2 \
  --max-count 4 \
  --count 2
```

14. Use Azure CLI to create some scale-in and scale-out rules based on CPU usage for the autoscaler profile you just created. Your scale-out rule should trigger when CPU percentage is over 70% over a 5 min period. Your scale-in rule should trigger when CPU percentage has dropped below 30% over a 5 min period.

15. Use Azure CLI to check how many instances are currently running in the scale set.

16. Get the connection info for the individual instances in the scale set.

```bash
az vmss list-instance-connection-info \
  --resource-group $RESOURCE_GROUP \
  --name $VMSS_NAME
```

17. SSH into each instance and generate some load so we can trigger the scale-out rule. Use the top command to ensure CPU usage is increasing before you log out of the instance.

```bash
sudo apt-get -y install stress ; sudo stress --cpu 10 --timeout 420 &
```

?> You will need to specify a different port number (e.g. 50001) when you SSH into the instances.

18. Confirm if a new instance has been added after about 5 minutes. After waiting for the stress test to finish and another 5 minutes, the scale set should return to 2 instances.

19. Cleanup by deleting the resource group.
