# 7.1 Volumes 

Kubernetes does not come with data persistence out of the box. For example, if a container in a pod crashes the kubelet will restart the container but with a clean state. The responsibility is on the developer to ensure that our applications have proper storage and data persistence. The [volume](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) abstraction gives developers the ability to achieve those goals. At its core, a volume is a directory that stores data and is accessible to containers in a pod. There are three storage requirements that should be met: Storage should not depend on the pod lifecycle; Storage must be available on all nodes; Storage needs to survive even if a cluster crashes. 

In this section we will be exploring three different volume abstractions: Persistent volumes, persistent volume claims, and storage classes. 

## Persistent Volumes and Persistent Volume Claims

To help developers with storage and persisting data Kubernetes offers us two API resources: Persistent volumes and persistent volume claims. A persistent volume is a cluster resource that is used to store data. PVs are plugins like volumes, but have a lifecycle independent from any pod that uses a PV. A Persistent volume claim is a request for storage by a user. Much like pods consume node resources, PVCs consume PV resources. PVs are resources in the cluster and PVCs are requests to use those resources. 

The high level lifecycle for PVs and PVCs can be broken into a few parts. We first provision our PV, this can be done statically or dynamically. Next a user creates a PVC with the specified amount of storage. A control loop watches for new PVCs and if possible, matches a PV and binds them together.

> **Before jumping into the exercises we recommend reading a little bit about volumes, PVs, and PVCs** [Here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)

## Exercise 1 - PVs and PVCs
In this exercise we will create a simple PV and PVC.

1. Use Docker Desktop for your cluster.
2. Copy this simple PV definition yaml to `pv-definition.yaml`

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata: 
    name: my-first-pv
spec: 
    accessModes: 
        - ReadWriteOnce
    capacity:
        storage: 1Gi
    hostPath: 
        path: /tmp/data
```
!> *The `hostPath` field should not be used in production as it poses security risks. It is fine for demonstration purposes*

3. Use the command `kubectl get pv` to list your persistentVolumes. *Remember that PVs are cluster scoped, therefore they do not belong to a particular namespace*

4. Now that you have created a PV, create a PVC that will bind to the PV you just created.

?> Hint: Look at the Kubernetes documentation on pvcs

## Exercise 2 - Mount to a PVC

Now that you have created both a persistent volume and a persistent volume claim, let's look at how to utilize them. 

Here is a pod definition yaml that uses an alpine image, generates a random number between 1-100 and saves the result to a file. 

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: myPod
spec:
  containers:
    - name: apline
      image: alpine
      command: ["/bin/sh", "-c"]
      args: ["shuf -i 0-100 -n 1 >> /opt/number.out;"]
```
1. Save this file to `pod-definition.yaml` and apply it to the cluster with `kubectl apply -f pod-definition.yaml`

?> Note: We create our pod definition declaritively. What would deploying this pod using an imperative command look like? If there is time see if you can recreate this pod without a pod-definition.yaml

2. As we can see, if this pod dies or the container needs to be recreated we will lose the file with our randomly generated number. Add the necessary fields under the spec for this pod to mount the data to our previously created PVC. 

## Exercise 3 - Jenkins

By now you are familiar with Jenkins. However, in previous exercises you were using Jenkins just for demonstration pruposes and didn't need to worry about persisting data. What if we needed to provision Jenkins instances in our cluster and needed to make sure that if the pod crashed or the container re created we wouldn't lose our Jenkins user? This is another excellent use case for PVs and PVCs

1. Create a PV with the name `pv-jenkins`, a capacity of 5 Gigabytes, access modes of read and write once, and a storage type of host path. 

2. Next, create a pvc that will request resources from the previously made pv, named `pvc-jenkins`. 

3. Next we will use a Kubernetes deployment to deploy our Jenkins pod. Copy the Jenkins deployment definition below and save it to a yaml file called `jenkins-deployment.yaml`. 

<details>
    <summary>Click for configuration</summary>

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: jenkins
  namespace: jenkins-dev
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: jenkins
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: jenkins
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: jenkins/jenkins:lts
        imagePullPolicy: Always
        name: container-0
        ports:
          - name: http-port
            containerPort: 8080
          - name: jnlp-port
            containerPort: 50000
        securityContext:
          allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
          privileged: true
          readOnlyRootFilesystem: false
          runAsUser: 0
```

</details>

4. Add the required fields to our deployment definition that mounts the data to the previously created pvc. The fields are exactly the same as a pod for adding volume mounts and pvcs. 

?> Hint: The `mountPath` field should be set to `/var/jenkins_home`

5. Make sure you can access Jenkins and go through the setup process. 

6. Delete your pod. Does the data persist when it is redeployed? 


## Exercise 4 - Storage Classes

So far we have seen how to provision a persistent volume statically. However this can become tedious as an administrator you would have to manually provision hundreds of these for teams of developers in an orginazation. We can instead provision PVs dynamically, allowing storage volumes to be created on demand. To achieve this a cluster admin can define as many `StorageClass` objects as needed. 

1. Acting as a cluster administrator, you need to pre-create a storage class object that developers can use. Look into how to create a storage class object in kubernetes 
## Deliverables 

- Discuss the importance of having data persistence.
- What does the 