# ECS

In this section we'll be exploring the functionality and use of Amazon's Elastic Container Service (ECS). Unlike the virtual instances you've used previously in this chapter, ECS uses Docker containers linked together in logical clusters, allowing for users to quickly and easily start and stop containers as needed.

> Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) is a highly scalable, high-performance container orchestration service that supports Docker containers and allows you to easily run and scale containerized applications on AWS. Amazon ECS eliminates the need for you to install and operate your own container orchestration software, manage and scale a cluster of virtual machines, or schedule containers on those virtual machines. [Amazon Elastic Container Service](https://aws.amazon.com/ecs/)

## Exercise

Unlike running Docker containers locally, when running containers on ECS, a developer may not know exactly where each container is located. Because of this, we'll need networking configuration to allow containers to ensure containers can communicate with each other. For this purpose we'll use [Weavenet](https://www.weave.works/oss/net/), a service that runs on the EC2 instances your containers run on, and automatically configures the required networking for you.

For the first exercise, we'll follow along with [Architecting Microservices Using Weavenet](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/apn/architecting-microservices-using-weave-net-and-amazon-ec2-container-service/).
1. If needed, create an IAM Role for your EC2 instance to run with, it will need several permissions within ECS and EC2 to run.
2. Create a cluster within ECS
3. Create a launch configuration and autoscaling group to start an EC2 instance and connect it to your ECS cluster.
4. Once you have an EC2 instance to run containers on, you can set up your containers within ECS. Using the guide above, set up your frontend and backend containers and run them.
5. Verify that your demo was set up by visiting the front end in your browser.

## Exercise

Setting up microservices by hand can be difficult, especially when you have a lot of service and containers to configure. Many tools exist to automate the process, including Amazon's Cloud Formation service. In this exercise we'll set up a much larger microserver demo using Cloud Formation alongside ECS.

1.

## Deliverables
- Discuss some similarities and differences between EC2 and ECS.

